<<<PAGE 1>>>
arXiv:2505.08315v1  [astro-ph.IM]  13 May 2025
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aa53919-25 ©ESO 2025
June 11, 2025
viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the
infrared
Reaching 3 m/s in the K band of CRIRES + with telluric modelling
J. Köhler1, M. Zechmeister2, A. Hatzes1, S. Chamarthi1, E. Nagel2, U. Seemann2, 3, P. Ballester3, P. Bristow3,
P. Chaturvedi4, 1, R. J. Dorn3, E. Guenther1, V . D. Ivanov3, Y . Jung3, O. Kochukhov5, T. Marquart5, L. Nortmann2,
R. Palsa3, N. Piskunov5, A. Reiners2, F. Rodler6, and J. V . Smoker6
1 TLS Tautenburg, Sternwarte 5, 07778 Tautenburg, Germany
e-mail: jana@tls-tautenburg.de
2 Universität Göttingen, Institut für Astrophysik, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen, Germany
3 European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 2, 85748 Garchingen, Germany
4 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 400005 Mumbai, India
5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden
6 European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Cordova 3107, Vitacura, Casilla 19001, Santiago, Chile
Received 27 January 2025 / Accepted 22 April 2025
ABSTRACT
Context. High-precision radial velocity (RV) measurements with slit spectrographs require the instrument profile (IP) and Earth’s
atmospheric spectrum to be known and to be incorporated into the RV calculation.
Aims. We developed an RV pipeline, called Velocity and IP EstimatoR ( viper), to achieve high-precision RVs in the near-infrared
(NIR). The code is able to process observations taken with a gas cell and includes modelling of the IP and telluric lines.
Methods. We utilised least-square fitting and telluric forward modelling to account for instrument instabilities and atmospheric ab-
sorption lines. As part of this process, we demonstrate the creation of telluric-free stellar spectra.
Results. By applying viper to observations obtained with the upgraded CRyogenic high-resolution InfraRed Echelle Spectrograph
(CRIRES+) and a gas absorption cell in theK band, we are able to reach an RV precision of around 3 m/s over a time span of 2.5 years.
For observations using telluric lines for the wavelength reference, an RV precision of 10 m/s is achieved.
Conclusions. We demonstrate that despite telluric contamination, a high RV precision is possible at NIR wavelengths, even for a
slit spectrograph with varying IP. Furthermore, we show that CRIRES + performs well and is an excellent choice for science studies
requiring precise stellar RV measurements in the infrared.
Key words. methods: data analysis – techniques: radial velocities – techniques: spectroscopic – planets and satellites: detection –
instrumentation: infrared spectrographs
1. Introduction
In recent years, a number of new instruments and data reduc-
tion pipelines have been developed to obtain high-precision ra-
dial velocities (RVs). In particular in the optical, considerable
progress has been made and RV precision below 50 cm /s has
been reached, for example by ESPRESSO and MAROON-X
(e.g. Pepe et al. 2021; Basant et al. 2025). Yet, the RV preci-
sion in the near-infrared (NIR) is trailing behind. This is due to
a number of factors, such as imprinted atmospheric absorption
lines, lower stellar information content, different types of detec-
tors, and usable calibration lamps. However, observations in the
NIR are important for the search and study of exoplanets around
cool low-mass stars that are faint at optical wavelengths. Not
only are M dwarfs brightest in the NIR, the signal of stellar ac-
tivity is also reduced at longer wavelengths. For the detection of
super-Earths around these stars, an RV accuracy of better than
3 m/s is required.
Only recently has an RV accuracy of less than 1 m /s been
achieved, with NIRPS in the H band (Artigau et al. 2024). In the
K band, an accuracy of 5 m /s over a timescale of one year was
reached with the iSHELL spectrograph using a methane gas cell
(Cale et al. 2019). With its ammonia gas cell, the original CRyo-
genic high-resolution InfraRed Echelle Spectrograph (CRIRES)
achieved a long-term RV accuracy of 5.4 m /s in the K band
(Bean et al. 2010). Whereas a line-by-line approach was used
on telluric-corrected spectra to determine the NIRPS RVs, the
results for iSHELL and CRIRES were obtained using a forward
model that included parameters for the telluric spectrum. Here, a
double challenge arises from the fact that CRIRES and iSHELL
are not fibre-fed (as is the case with high-precision spectrographs
such as NIRPS) which results in a varying instrument profile
(IP). Therefore, the tellurics vary not only in depth but also with
the changing IP. We face the same challenge in our software.
In this paper we introduce the RV pipeline viper1 (Veloc-
ity and IP EstimatoR; Zechmeister et al. 2021). The philosophy
of viper is to offer a publicly available and user-friendly code
that is able to process data from various spectrographs. viper
is officially provided by the consortium that built the upgraded
CRIRES (CRIRES+; Dorn et al. 2023). Originally designed to
1 https://mzechmeister.github.io/viper_RV_pipeline
Article number, page 1 of 14

<<<PAGE 2>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
handle data from optical instruments, following the procedure
from Butler et al. (1996), the code now has been extended to en-
able the processing of NIR data.viper uses a least-square fitting
to model the stellar RV as well as the temporal and spatial vari-
able IP. We have improved upon this method by adding a term
for the telluric spectrum that enables the forward modelling of
molecules present in the Earth’s atmosphere.
In this paper we use CRIRES + observations in the K band
to demonstrate viper’s ability to handle data in the NIR. First,
we provide an overview of the techniques and algorithms used
in viper. We show that it is possible to achieve an RV accuracy
of 3 m /s over a period of 2.5 years with the use of a gas cell.
Additionally, we present a study of the stability of atmospheric
lines in the NIR. With viper it is possible to handle data taken
with or without a gas cell, and we show that a long-term RV
precision of around 10 m /s can be achieved when using only
telluric lines for the wavelength calibration.
2. The algorithm
The main concept of viper is based on the forward model de-
scribed in Butler et al. (1996). This involves creating a model
that is optimised to best match the observation. The observations
are expected to be performed with the use of a gas cell in the light
path, resulting in a spectrum that is a product of stellar and gas
cell lines. An observation of the star without gas cell lines, which
we call the stellar templateS star, serves as a reference to calculate
differential Doppler shifts vstar of the stellar absorption lines. A
further discussion on the stellar template will follow in Sect. 2.2.
The modelling process requires an ultra-high resolution (spectral
resolving power of≈ 106) transmission spectrum of the gas cell
Tcell that is often obtained with a Fourier transform spectrometer
(FTS). The spectral lines of the absorbing gas in the cell serve
as the wavelength reference and enable us to monitor the IP. For
the wavelength solution λ(x) at a given pixel x, we used a low
degree polynomial, using the wavelength solution generated by
a data reduction pipeline as an initial guess. This results in the
following forward model S (x) for the observed spectrum:
S (x) = k· [Tcell (λ)· S star(λ(vstar))]⊗ IP(λ, x), (1)
where⊗ represents the convolution. The term k is a flux nor-
malisation, which can be just a scalar to handle di fferent flux
levels, or a smooth function (low order polynomial) over pixel
(or wavelength) to take into account gradients due to imperfect
atmospheric dispersion corrections or even the shape of the blaze
function.
Although we denote wavelengths, we actually worked with
logarithmic wavelengths. This parametrisation is generally more
suitable, since the resolution in this domain is usually less vari-
able than in wavelength or pixel space. Likewise the IP is de-
fined in velocity, which also corresponds to logarithmic wave-
lengths. The over-sampled convolved forward model is still on a
discrete, uniform log-wavelength grid. It is linearly interpolated
to compute the model at the observed pixels, whose wavelengths
is evaluated from the modelled wavelength solution.
Using the least-square fitting algorithm curvefit from
scipy.optimize (Jones et al. 2001), the parameters for the nor-
malisation, wavelength solution, IP, and Doppler shift are opti-
mised concurrently. Instrumental shifts, caused by, for example,
temperature or pressure fluctuations, are captured by the simul-
taneous wavelength solution.
At optical wavelengths, iodine is the most common molecule
used in absorption cells, as it is rich in sharp lines and enables
precise RV measurements at low costs. Since iodine has very
weak absorption lines above∼6 000 Å, other molecules are re-
quired for instruments operating in the NIR range. In the case of
CRIRES+, the gas cell is filled with a multi-species gas, contain-
ing NH 3, 13CH4, and C 2H2 (Seemann et al. 2014; Dorn et al.
2023). The Earth’s atmosphere also provides lines usable for
the wavelength calibration, although these lines vary strongly in
depth and slightly in position, depending on the time of observa-
tion (see Sect. 2.1).
Observations are taken in the Earth rest frame, and therefore,
a correction for the barycentric motion is needed. This velocity
shift can be written as
z0 = λ0
λ′− 1, (2)
with λ′ being the observed wavelength and λ0 the barycentric-
corrected wavelength. For an observer in the barycentre, the
measured velocity shift of the star, with respect to the wavelength
of the stellar templateλtpl, is
z = λ0
λtpl
− 1. (3)
The stellar motion, or RV , is v = cz, with c being the speed
of light. With v as the input parameter we are interested in, the
wavelengths is Doppler shifted according to
λtpl =λ′ 1 + z0
1 + v
c
. (4)
We chose in viper the optimisation with non-relativistic ve-
locities, which is a fair assumption for our science pur-
poses. Yet, we applied the barycentric correction to the stellar
template beforehand using relativistic velocities. A more de-
tailed description can be found in Wright & Eastman (2014).
For the calculation of the barycentric correction, we used
the SkyCoord.radial_velocity_correction function from
astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013).
As the model parameters vary with wavelength, the spectrum
is processed in wavelength segments, or chunks, which can be
as large as one echelle order. For each chunk indexed witho, the
least-square fitting provides a covariance matrix, whose diagonal
provides formal uncertainties for each parameter. For the RVs,
we use ϵo to denote the uncertainty. The final RV is a weighted
mean of the RVs calculated for each individual chunk:
RV =
Pϵ−2
o · RVo
Pϵ−2o
. (5)
The corresponding uncertainty is calculated as
ϵRV =
s
1
No− 1·
Pϵ−2o · (RVo− RV)2
Pϵ−2o
, (6)
with No being the number of processed chunks.
2.1. T elluric forward modelling
Molecules present in our Earth’s atmosphere lead to emission
and absorption features in the observed spectra. Masking out the
telluric a ffected regions is a common approach in the optical
region where the tellurics line density is low. This is unfeasi-
ble in the NIR where the line density is increasing dramatically
and nearly the entire wavelength range is contaminated. Indeed,
masking telluric features with a depth greater than 2% eliminates
Article number, page 2 of 14

<<<PAGE 3>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
up to 50% of the spectrum in the K band. Yet, micro-tellurics
(with depths lower than 2%) do have an impact on the accuracy
of the measured RVs.
One common way to deal with this problem is to use syn-
thetic spectra of the Earth’s atmosphere to model and remove
telluric lines from the observed spectra. Prominent codes for this
purpose are MolecFit (Smette et al. 2015), TelFit (Gullikson
et al. 2014), and Tapas (Bertaux et al. 2014). Although it is pos-
sible to run viper on spectra corrected in advance for tellurics,
we chose to model the tellurics simultaneously. The idea of using
telluric lines for the wavelength calibration was first proposed by
Griffin & Griffin (1973). There also have been a few attempts to
include tellurics in a forward modelling process. This was done,
for example, by Bean et al. (2010) for the RV determination of
the original CRIRES and more recently by Hirano et al. (2020)
for the data of the IRD spectrograph and by Cale et al. (2019)
for the data of the iSHELL spectrograph.
By extending Eq. (1) with a term for the telluric absorption
lines, the forward modelling becomes
S (x) = k· [Tcell (λ)· Tatm (λ, vatm)· S star(λ, vstar)]⊗ IP(λ, x). (7)
Here Tatm represents the telluric model, which is a product of the
transmission of individual molecules:
Tatm =
Y
molec
Tmolec(λ,α molec). (8)
In the K band, the dominating molecules are water, methane,
and carbon dioxide (Fig. 1). Their line depths depend on the air-
mass and the molecular column density, which vary over time.
In particular, the water content can vary a lot, which is described
by the integrated water vapour (IWV). The IWV is calculated
via an integral over a density function of the condensed water
through the entire atmosphere in the line of sight. The radiative
transfer equation for the telluric transmission spectrum is
Tmolec(λ) = e−σmolec(λ)·nmolec·z, (9)
whereσ is the effective cross-section, n the average number den-
sity and z the path length (related to airmass). For water, the av-
erage number density is related to the IWV . The changing line
depth therefore can be adjusted using an exponent:
Tmolec (λ) = Tmolec,syn (λ)αmolec. (10)
Since airmass and density are degenerate, one model parameter
is sufficient. For αmolec = 1, we have the components of our ref-
erence atmosphere, which was computed for airmass= 1 and for
IWV = 1 mm. Thus, the parameterαmolec corresponds to airmass
and, in the case of water, to IWV . A detailed study can be found
in Leet et al. (2019).
The synthetic atmosphere modelTmolec,syn(λ), which we used
as a starting guess, was created for each molecule using a line-
by-line radiative transfer model ( LBLRTM; Clough & Iacono
1995; Clough et al. 2005) and characteristic parameters for the
location of the Very Large Telescope (VLT). During the opti-
misation procedure, the exponent αmolec will be fitted for each
molecule to correct for changes caused by airmass, IWV and
seasonal effects.
Another option would be the application of only two co-
efficients – one for water and a combined one for all other
molecules. This is possible under the assumption that seasonal
variations of the non-water molecules are expected to be small
compared to the influence of a varying airmass. However, test-
ing demonstrated that in most cases a better RV precision
Fig. 1. Synthetic spectra in the K band for molecules present in the
Earth’s atmosphere, calculated for an airmass of 1, and an IWV of 1 mm
for water. The first, second, and third panels show the spectra of the
dominant species CO2, CH4, and H2O, while the fourth panel shows the
less dominant contributors N 2O and CO. The bottom panel shows the
combined spectrum.
was achieved by the usage of a individual coe fficient for each
molecule. For observations with a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) be-
low 50, we cannot distinguish between micro-tellurics and noise.
With the assignment of a combined coe fficient for non-water
molecules, the modelling of molecules with weaker absorption
(e.g. N 2O and CO) will benefit from a correct modelling of
molecules with stronger absorption (e.g. CH 4 and CO2). Within
viper, both options for the coefficients are available.
Supplementary to the exponents, an additional parameter
vatm for the telluric Doppler shift is introduced. From the study
by Figueira et al. (2010a), it is known that the telluric lines can be
stable down to 10 m/s depending on changes in wind speed and
the velocity of atmospheric components such as the jet stream.
Although incorrect telluric Doppler shifts have less of an impact
when additional gas cell lines are used for the wavelength cali-
bration, a correction of these shifts is required when aiming for
3 m/s or below. The current implementation of the code applies a
common shift for all molecules, assuming all molecules experi-
ence the same weather conditions. This is obviously not entirely
true, as the variations of the volume-mixing ratio with altitude
are different for the various molecules.
Article number, page 3 of 14

<<<PAGE 4>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
Currently, our model is not able to adjust for changing line
profiles, as caused by variations of the air pressure (see e.g.
Smette et al. 2015; Allart et al. 2022). Under the premise of small
pressure variations, the profile is expected to remain stable and
changes to be negligible compared to instrumental e ffects. This
is a valid assumption for the VLT at Paranal, where we have cal-
culated a mean air pressure of 744.35 hPa with a standard devi-
ation of 1.31 hPa for the 2.5 years of our observations. As a side
note, for the temperature we calculate a mean value of 12.16◦C
with a standard deviation of 2.53◦C. It should be noted that these
values represent the conditions on the ground and are expected
to vary in the higher layers of the atmosphere.
Wang et al. (2022) simulated and discussed the impact of a
wrong telluric line profile. For K-band data, the telluric forward
modelling with an incorrect telluric line profile results in an RV
scatter of 6.8 m /s. For other discussed bands, which have less
strong telluric lines, this value varies between 0.008 m/s (B band)
and 3.5 m /s (J band). By their definition of the model, the RV
scatter would be 0 m/s under the assumption of a correct telluric
line profile. As there is no explicit declaration of the deviation
from the correct line profile, the obtained values should be con-
sidered an upper limit.
For a first test, we used telluric standard stars, which are
hot (i.e. with few lines), rapidly rotating (shallow and broad
lines) stars whose observed spectra are dominated by the tel-
luric features. Considering the example of α Aql (A7 star,
mK = 0.24 mag), the telluric forward modelling with viper is
demonstrated in Fig. 2 for two parts of the spectrum. The obser-
vation was taken at an airmass of 1.47 and an IWV of 3.22 mm,
the S/N is about 300. For the spectral order containing telluric
lines with transmission depths of 0.4, the standard deviation of
the residuals is 0.6%. For the spectral order contaminated by
strong tellurics, down to a transmission value of 0.1, the standard
deviation of the residuals is 1%, leaving visible structures in the
residuals. Observations of the same star with lower airmass and
IWV , are modelled accurately to 0.5% and 0.75% for the same
wavelength regions (not plotted here). For demonstration pur-
poses an observation affected by deep telluric lines was chosen
to demonstrate the performance capability of viper. It should
be noted that the precise modelling of deep lines is a common
problem in all telluric correction codes. Thus, our results are in
good agreement with the residual values between 0.6% and 1.2%
as reported by Smette et al. (2015), when running MolecFit on
K-band data from the original CRIRES instrument.
2.2. Creation of telluric-free stellar templates
In this section we discuss the removal of telluric lines from ob-
servations of M dwarfs. This is necessary for the creation of the
telluric-free stellar templates, which later will serve as reference
for the RV determination. It is recommended to use a template
generated from stellar observations over the use of a synthetic
spectrum, for example that obtained from PHOENIX (Husser
et al. 2013). As discussed in earlier papers, observed stellar tem-
plates produce better RV results (e.g. Figueira et al. 2010b). Our
tests confirmed this.
viper offers the option of generating a stellar template by
co-adding several observations. In a first step, the telluric lines
are modelled and removed from the individual spectra, which
were obtained without a gas cell. We adjusted Eq. (7) by setting
Tcell and S star to one to derive the telluric model:
S atm(x) = k· Tatm (λ)⊗ IP(λ, x). (11)
After optimising all model parameters, we divided our observa-
tion by S atm to get the telluric-free stellar spectrum:
S star(λ) = S obs(λ)
S atm (λ). (12)
It should be noted that the deconvolution of the spectra is not yet
implemented in the template creation process with viper.
The imperfections of the atmospheric model becomes vis-
ible in the residuals of the corrected spectrum at the locations
where particularly deep telluric lines occur. To address this issue
and further increase the S /N of the stellar template, it is recom-
mended to combine observations from different epochs. Telluric
features are relatively stable in wavelength with respect to stel-
lar lines, but unlike the latter are not subjected to the barycentric
motion of the Earth. Co-adding several spectra that were taken at
different barycentric velocities, and are corrected for that, helps
reduce residuals from the telluric correction, as they are averaged
out.
To ensure a good quality of the final telluric-free stellar tem-
plate S tpl, a weighted mean was applied:
S tpl(λ) =
P wn(λ)· S star,n(λ)P wn(λ) , (13)
with n denoting the observations at different epochs. The weight-
ing wn(λ) decreases linearly with the telluric transmission at a
given wavelength, as residuals are expected to be stronger for
deeper lines. Additionally, noise contaminated parts, represented
by the flux errorϵS star,n, were down-weighted. The final weighting
factor becomes
wn(λ) = Tatm,n(λ)
ϵS star,n(λ)2. (14)
Figure 3 illustrates this procedure on the M dwarf GJ 588.
The top panels demonstrate the telluric correction applied on a
single observation in two spectral orders. The corresponding cor-
rected spectrum is plotted in the second row. In the third row, 12
observations, taken between March and August 2022, are plotted
above each other, after correcting for the barycentric motion. Al-
though all output stellar spectra are in good agreement with each
other, systematics in the residuals become visible especially for
the order contaminated by deep tellurics. These disappear in the
co-added spectrum, plotted in the bottom panels. For the later
RV calculation, the template will be trimmed at the edges, to get
rid of wavelength ranges with low S/N.
The method is straightforward for RV standard stars (stars
that show moderate RV variability). However, the situation be-
comes more complex when Doppler shifts are present, such as
in the case of a star with an existing exoplanet. In such cases,
an alternative approach is required. In a first step, we applied
the telluric correction to one observation, preferably with a high
S/N. Afterwards, this spectrum can serve as reference template
for all of the other observations. This is done by using Eq. (7)
and setting Tcell to unity. Before the co-adding, the wavelengths
will be corrected for the calculated RV shifts. To improve the
quality of the final stellar template, this procedure is repeated,
taking the recent generated spectrum as template input for an-
other iteration.
In Fig. 4, the created stellar spectrum is used as template
for the modelling of an observation of GJ 588 obtained with the
gas cell (S/N≈ 350). The model is according to Eq. (7) a prod-
uct of stellar, cell, and telluric lines. The standard deviations of
the residuals are 0.8% and 1.3% for this M dwarf, and there-
fore slightly worse compared to the modelling of the early-type
telluric standard standard star.
Article number, page 4 of 14

<<<PAGE 5>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
Fig. 2. CRIRES+ observation of the telluric standard starα Aql from 17 August 2021 (airmass = 1.47, IWV = 3.22 mm) for two different chunks
(left and center panels) and a zoom-in (right panel). Top panels: Observed spectrum (red) without the gas cell, and the best-fit telluric model (blue)
from viper. Bottom panels: Residuals and their standard deviations.
Fig. 3. Telluric correction and template generation of the M dwarf GJ 588 for two different chunks. First row: CRIRES+ observation from 8 August
2022 of the star (red) overlaid with the best-fit telluric model obtained with viper (blue). Second row: Telluric-corrected spectrum. Third row:
Individual telluric-corrected spectra taken between March and August 2022. Last row: Co-added spectrum using the average of the individual
observations from the plot above. This represents the final stellar template, which is used as reference for the RV determination.
Fig. 4. Same as Fig. 2 but for the M dwarf GJ 588 observation (obtained with the gas cell) from 8 August 2022 (airmass= 1.3, IWV = 1.23 mm).
Article number, page 5 of 14

<<<PAGE 6>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
2.3. Advantages of the telluric forward modelling
The decision to choose telluric forward modelling over other
techniques comes with a number of advantages. To begin with,
using synthetic molecular spectra for the correction of telluric
lines saves valuable observing time that would have been spent
to obtain a high signal-to-noise spectrum on a telluric standard.
However, it still has to be clarified whether the forward mod-
elling is preferred over the removal of tellurics before the deter-
mination of the RVs. Here, a number of benefits can be given.
First, by using a precalculated telluric standard model, no addi-
tional code for the telluric correction is needed, which reduces
working steps and computing time. For instance, while the tel-
luric correction with MolecFit takes several minutes for one
CRIRES+ spectrum, the forward modelling in viper requires
a few seconds for the same dataset. Second, in regions with a
low gas cell line density, telluric lines can serve as an additional
wavelength reference, improving the achieved precision. A third
benefit comes from the mathematical treatment of the convolu-
tion. As (S star· Tatm)⊗ IP , (S star⊗ IP)· (Tatm⊗ IP), the division
of a telluric spectrum is mathematically incorrect and will result
in inaccuracies in the obtained stellar spectrum (see Nagel et al.
2023). Instead, the forward modelling follows the correct order
of multiplication and convolution, avoiding this problem. How-
ever, this would require that we have access to the real stellar
spectrum, S star, which is not the case since we did not follow
the correct order of multiplication and convolution during the
telluric correction (Eq. (12)). This results in errors, as shown in
Wang et al. (2022) and Nagel et al. (2023), which are largest in
regions with deep tellurics. We tried to minimise these residuals
in the template generation by down-weighting with the telluric
transmission depth (Eq. (14)). By co-adding several spectra from
different epochs, these residuals should be largely, but not com-
pletely, averaged out.
Further, it should be mentioned that various studies have
shown a higher RV precision is obtained when using for-
ward modelling instead of the cross-correlation-function method
(e.g. Wang et al. 2022). However, the simultaneous absorption
method requires the presence of a cell or at least telluric lines
for the wavelength calibration. For wavelength regions that are
free from these lines, no accurate RV calculation is possible. In
addition, a stellar template with high S/N that is free of cell and
telluric lines is needed. The accuracy of the RVs depends on the
quality of the template.
3. Data processing with viper
viper processes 1D spectra as produced by most data reduction
pipelines. From the input data, a first guess for all parameters
is created. These parameters will later be optimised during the
least-square fitting.
As the parameters change with wavelength, and partly even
over a small wavelength range, each spectral order should be
treated separately. If one order extends over multiple detectors,
as for CRIRES+, the RV is computed separately for each subor-
der that falls on one detector. It is possible to subdivide an order
into smaller chunks, of several hundred pixels, to handle changes
in the IP along a spectral order. In the case of our observations
taken with CRIRES+, this did not improve the results. Likely, the
IP does not change a lot over an order. Further, smaller chunks
can result in a loss of lines for the wavelength calibration. Long
chunks are especially helpful for regions with a low line density
and observations with low S/N.
We developed viper to calculate RVs using various instru-
ments, each with distinct properties. The user can select vari-
ous parameter settings such as the polynomial degree for the
wavelength solution and normalisation, as well as the IP model,
which should be applied. viper provides a range of models,
from Gaussian or Lorentzian profiles to more complex asymmet-
ric shapes. In addition, it is possible to mask wavelength regions
or set thresholds for masking outlier data points, which are, for
example, caused by cosmic ray hits.
The current release of viper (version 1.1) comes with stan-
dard molecular models for the Earth’s atmosphere for wave-
lengths from 3 500–25 000 Å, covering all bands from the op-
tical to the NIR. For the RV determination it is possible to use
just cell lines, just telluric lines, or a combination of the two as
the wavelength reference.
4. Observations
We used observations obtained with CRIRES+ in the K band to
demonstrate the capabilities ofviper. These data are well suited
to test our method and prove that high-precision RV measure-
ments in the reddest part of the NIR are possible.
4.1. CRIRES +
CRIRES+ (Dorn et al. 2023) is installed at the ESO VLT in
Paranal and operates from 0.95−5.3 µm, covering the Y JHKLM
bands, with a resolving power of around 50 000 (0.4 ′′slit) or
100 000 (0.2′′slit). A gas cell for simultaneous wavelength cali-
bration is available for the H and K band (Seemann et al. 2014).
By making use of the gas cell, CRIRES+ is expected to reach an
RV precision of around 3 m /s. The absorption gas cell is filled
with multi-species gas, including NH 3, 13CH4, and C 2H2 (re-
solving power FTS = 1 538 000; Seemann et al. 2014). Observa-
tions indicate that CRIRES + suffers from instrumental drifts up
to 200 m/s within a few hours, and up to 800 m /s (∼1 pixel) on
longer timescales, as documented in the CRIRES + User Man-
ual2. Without the use of a simultaneous wavelength calibration,
either by a gas cell or telluric lines, this would be the limiting
RV precision.
For each of the bands, multiple settings are available, cov-
ering different wavelength ranges. The cell spectra for three set-
tings in K band (K2148, K2166 and K2192) are plotted in Fig. 5.
Every setting contains six echelle orders, each falling on the
three detectors.
4.2. Sample selection
To monitor the stability of the CRIRES+ instrument, we selected
four RV standard stars from the publicly available RV database
HARPS-RVBANK published by Trifonov et al. (2020). We specifi-
cally targeted bright M dwarfs and employed an error-weighted
root-mean-square (rms) calculation of the HARPS RVs to iden-
tify targets with low RV scatter. Table 1 lists our targets together
with the number of HARPS spectra ( NHARPS) and the derived
rms values (rmsHARPS). A direct comparison of our results with
HARPS is difficult, as these measurements are made in the op-
tical. In addition, CRIRES+ is an instrument with many moving
parts and not fibre fed, unlike HARPS.
GJ 447 has a confirmed planet, but the orbital RV amplitude
is smaller than 1.5 m /s and therefore below the RV precision
2 https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/paranal/
instruments/crires/doc.html
Article number, page 6 of 14

<<<PAGE 7>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
Fig. 5. Spectrum of the short gas cell from CRIRES + for three settings in the K band, showing the covered wavelength range. The colours mark
the three different detectors.
expected for CRIRES+. The contribution of the planet signal to
our obtained RV results will be discussed in Sect. 5.
4.3. Observation set-up
Most of our observations were performed with the adaptive
optics system and the K2192 setting using the 0.2 ′′ wide slit
(R ∼ 100 000). The exposure time, which is set by the de-
tector integration time (DIT) and the number of such integra-
tions (NDIT), varies for the di fferent stars and even for obser-
vations of the same star. Our observations were performed with
DIT x NDIT between 40 s and 75 s. On top of that, several nod-
ding observations were taken to increase the S /N. The purpose
of the nodding procedure is to enable the subtraction of the in-
strument and sky background from the data by placing the star at
two different slit positions (here named A and B). For our final
spectra, the number of combined noddings varies between 2 and
8 (e.g. AB and AAAABBBB pattern). These integration times
yield S/N values between 100 and 350 for our sample of bright
stars.
4.4. Observations
Many observations, within a time range of a week, were taken
during the commissioning runs in June 2021 (COMM3) and Au-
gust 2021 (COMM4). Since April 2022, roughly one observation
per week of an RV standard star has been taken in the wavelength
setting K2192. In most cases, one spectrum was taken with the
gas cell and one without it. This gives us the opportunity to study
the stability of the instrument over a timescale of more than two
and a half years. Furthermore, during the commissioning runs in
2021, two time series of GJ 588 and GJ 784 over a time span of
around 3.7 hours were taken. This allows us to study the stabil-
ity on short timescales. The observations taken without the gas
cell are combined to create a high S/N template, while the obser-
vations with gas cell are used to calculate the RVs. The results
of the first two commissioning runs, which were performed in
January 2021 (COMM1) and February 2021 (COMM2), were
omitted from this analysis due to technical problems with the
instrument during that time.
4.5. Data reduction
The raw data were pre-processed with the ESO data reduction
system (DRS) cr2res3 (version 1.3.0). First, we reduced dark,
flat field, and wavelength calibration frames following the reduc-
tion steps described in the cr2res manual. Afterwards, the sci-
ence observations were reduced with thecr2res_obs_nodding
recipe, taking the produced calibration files as additional input.
The spectra from the A and B nodding positions are co-added to
a final spectrum, using the DRS pipeline. The blaze correction
was done with the help of a 1D spectrum of a flat field observa-
tion.
For the RV calculation withviper, we chose the wavelength
region between 21 300 and 24 700 Å. This corresponds to the
echelle orders 24, 25, and 26 spread over the three detectors
and the suborder on the first detector of echelle order 23. viper
treats those detector chunks separately and combines the results
afterwards as described by Eqs. (5) and (6). The wavelength re-
gion between 20 600 and 21 400 Å suffers from a lack of gas cell
lines (see Fig. 5), and the wavelength regions below 20 600 Å
and above 24 700 Å are contaminated by strong telluric bands.
Tests have shown that for a spectral suborder of 2048 pixels, a
polynomial degree of two for the wavelength solution and a sym-
metric Gaussian for the IP model deliver the best results for our
CRIRES+ observations.
3 https://www.eso.org/sci/software/pipelines/cr2res/
cr2res-pipe-recipes.html
Article number, page 7 of 14

<<<PAGE 8>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
Table 1. Sample of RV standard stars.
.
Target Sp.type m a
K Nb
HARPS rmsb
HARPS Nc
CR+ rmsc
CR+ rmsc
CR+ rmsc
CR+ time spanc
cell/no cell ( vstar, cell) ( vstar, no cell) ( vatm, cell)
[mag] [m /s] [m /s] [m /s] [m /s]
GJ 447 M4.0 d 5.65 201 2.76 21 / 21 4.16 12.56 11.60 Jun 2021 - Jun 2023
GJ 588 M2.5 e 4.76 270 1.74 61 / 37 3.01 9.89 7.21 Jun 2021 - Aug 2023
GJ 229A M1.0 f 4.63 201 2.60 29 / 29 3.99 15.57 16.93 Aug 2021 - Jan 2024
GJ 784 M0.0 g 4.28 40 5.76 76 / 46 5.01 10.89 7.35 Jun 2021 - Oct 2023
Notes. (a) Cutri et al. (2003) (b) Trifonov et al. (2020) (c) This work (d) Kesseli et al. (2019) (e) Walker (1983) ( f ) Kirkpatrick et al. (1991) (g) Torres
et al. (2006).
Fig. 6. Left: RV time series over 2.5 years for all four stars together (top) and for each source (bottom). Right: Gas cell spectrum obtained with the
FTS and the telluric spectrum (top) and the telluric-free stellar templates (bottom) for one order created with viper, as described in Sect. 2.1.
Article number, page 8 of 14

<<<PAGE 9>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
Fig. 7. Scatter of RV measurements for the standard star sample on a timescale of days. Left: COMM3 observations from June 2021. Right:
COMM4 observations from August 2021. RV precision values of the order of 2-3 m/s were reached over a time range of several days.
Fig. 8. Scatter of RV measurements for GJ 588 (14 June 2021, top) and GJ 784 (17 August 2021, bottom). Left: Time series performed over a time
range of around 3.7 hours. Right: Relations between the RV and various weather parameter together with the corresponding Pearson correlation
coefficient,ρ. Even with changing weather parameters, an RV precision of 2.18 m/s for GJ 588 and 3.06 m/s for GJ 784 is reached.
Article number, page 9 of 14

<<<PAGE 10>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
Fig. 9. RV measurements plotted against the BERV .
5. Results
In this section we present the RV results obtained with viper
and the method of the telluric forward modelling. First, we
present the RV results for the observations with the gas cell. Sec-
ond, we study the RV results for observations performed without
a gas cell, demonstrating that telluric lines can serve as wave-
length reference alone. For this, we studied the telluric line sta-
bility on longer timescales.
5.1. T emplate spectra
A telluric-free stellar template was generated for each star as out-
lined in Sect. 2.1. Around ten observations (without the gas cell)
at different epochs were combined to create an initial telluric-
free template (see Fig. 3 for GJ 588). To improve the quality of
the template, another three iterations of template creation were
performed, always using the previous template as reference in-
put. Tests with more observations or iterations of template cre-
ations did not significantly improve the final template or ob-
tained RV precision.
The final template for each star, for a selected wavelength
range, is plotted in the right panels of Fig. 6. The stellar line
density varies for the selected stars, depending on the spectral
type (see Table 1). Taking into account that the RV precision
depends on the stellar line depth and density, it is expected to
vary within our sample.
5.2. RV precision using the gas cell
Figure 6 (left) shows the 2.5 year RV time series for our standard
star sample, the rms values are listed in Table 1 (rms CR+(vstar,
cell)). For ease of comparison, individual targets are shown with
the same coloured symbol in each plot. The results from the two
commissioning runs are shown in Fig. 7, which gives an idea
of the RV stability on a timescale of several days. Furthermore,
during both commissioning runs, two time series of observations
covering 3.7 hours were performed for GJ 588 and GJ 784 and
are plotted in Fig. 8.
For the observations taken within a few hours or days, the
barycentric Earth radial velocity (BERV) hardly changes and
the impact of incorrect telluric modelling would be small, which
also leads to a higher RV accuracy. The situation is different for
observations taken over a period of one year. In Fig. 9 the RVs
are plotted against the BERV . We find no correlation between
these two values, but detect a higher Pearson correlation coef-
ficient for GJ784 and GJ229, which could be explained by the
lower stellar content, compared to GJ558 and GJ447, resulting
in a stronger influence of the telluric lines.
A Lomb-Scargle periodogram (Zechmeister & Kürster 2009)
for each star, the false alarm probability (Kuerster et al. 1997)
levels, known planet signals, and the harmonics of the Earth’s
period of one year are shown in Fig. 10. Simulations have
demonstrated that wrong line profiles from the tellurics can lead
to strong period signals at these harmonics (e.g. Wang et al.
2022). Similar issues are expected for other modelling errors.
Nevertheless, we do not detect such a signal for any of our stars.
5.2.1. GJ 447 (Ross 128)
GJ 447 is an M4.0V with m K = 5.65 mag, which has one con-
firmed planet with an orbital period of 9.87 days and a semi-
amplitude of 1.39 m/s (Bonfils et al. 2018). This semi-amplitude
is likely too small to be detectable with CRIRES +, thereby al-
lowing the target to be treated as an RV standard star. As the
latest spectral type, GJ 447 has the highest stellar line density of
our sample.
During COMM3, four observations over three nights were
taken, reaching a precision of 2.84 m /s (Fig. 7). On a timescale
of 25 months, a precision of 4.16 m/s could be reached for 22 ob-
servations. We obtain a predicted precision limit of 1.7 m /s for
GJ 447 for an observation with an S /N of 260. This S /N corre-
sponds to the mean S/N of all our observations of this target. We
calculated the predicted precision limit directly from the obser-
vation by applying the method described by Butler et al. (1996)
and Bouchy et al. (2001). In doing so, we considered all orders
used for the RV calculation but masked pixels at the edges of the
order. However, we did not mask regions that are contaminated
by telluric lines.
As expected, the planetary signal cannot be detected in the
Lomb-Scargle periodogram of the CRIRES + RV data (Fig. 10).
This is likely due to the low semi-amplitude of 1.39 m/s, as well
as due to our time sampling, which is roughly one observation
once every seven to ten days and therefore close to the planet’s
period.
5.2.2. GJ 588 (CD-40 9712)
GJ 588 is an M2.5 star with m K = 4.76 mag. It is a high proper
motion star with no confirmed planets. In our sample, it is
the star with the lowest RV variability in the HARPS dataset
(rmsHARPS = 1.74 m/s).
On 14 June 2021 (COMM3), 25 measurements of the star
were made within 3.75 hours (Fig. 8). Over the course of the ob-
servations the airmass ranged from 1.04 to 1.24. With an IWV
at zenith rising from 1.5 mm to 2.6 mm, the telluric impact from
water molecules became stronger towards the end. Wind speeds
Article number, page 10 of 14

<<<PAGE 11>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
Fig. 10. Lomb-Scargle periodograms for the RV standard sample. The vertical dotted grey lines represent the periods of the harmonics of one year
(from 365 days to 365/6 days). The vertical magenta lines denote known planet signals for GJ 447 and proposed planet signals for GJ 229A. The
horizontal grey lines represent the false alarm probability level of 1% (dashed line) and 10% (dash-dotted line).
from 12-17 m/s at the ground were measured. Despite changing
weather conditions, an rms of 2.2 m /s is reached and the cor-
relation between the measured RVs and the weather parameters
is weak with Pearson correlation coe fficients below 0.2 (Fig. 8
top).
GJ 588 was observed another ten times during four nights
in the same commissioning run. Here an rms of 2.6 m /s was
achieved. Likewise, for the six observations during five observ-
ing nights in COMM4 an RV precision of 1.89 m /s could be
obtained (Fig. 7). For the total number of 61 observations per-
formed over 26 months, an RV precision of 3 m /s is reached.
The average S/N value for all our observations of GJ 588 is 315,
and we calculate a predicted precision limit of 1.6 m /s for an
observation with this S/N using the method described above.
5.2.3. GJ 229A (HD 42581)
GJ 229A is an M1.0 star with m K = 4.17 mag. Until recently,
it appeared to have a companion with an orbital period of
52 890 days and amplitude of 17.06 m /s (Feng et al. 2020),
which turned out to be a binary of two brown dwarfs orbiting
each other (Xuan et al. 2024). Further, Feng et al. (2020) claimed
that GJ 229A has two planets with orbital periods of 523.2 days
(Kb = 1.63 m/s) and 122 days (Kc = 2.15 m/s), while Tuomi et al.
(2014) claimed one planet with an orbital period of 471 days
(Kb = 3.83 m/s). Only recently, Deslières et al. (2025) published
a paper showing that these signals are most likely caused by stel-
lar activity. Due to the long period of the binary and the small
amplitudes of the proposed planets, GJ 229A is an usable RV
standard star.
The star was observed ten times during three consecutive
nights in COMM4, leading to an rms of 1.84 m/s (Fig. 7). Over a
time range of 29 months, an rms of 3.99 m/s is reached for 29 ob-
servations. The predicted precision limit for this target is 1.4 m/s
for an observation with an S/N of 337, which corresponds to the
average S/N of all observations of GJ 229A.
In recent years, a number of papers have been published on
GJ 229, showing that it is a complex system that is not yet fully
understood. We included the proposed orbital periods of 523,
122 and 471 days in the Lomb-Scargle periodogram (Fig. 10),
but find no significant signal.
5.2.4. GJ 784 (HD 191849)
GJ 784 is an M0.0 dwarf with mK = 4.28 mag. Though it has no
confirmed planet, it is in our sample the star with the strongest
RV variations in the optical data (rmsHARPS = 5.76 m/s).
Similar to GJ 588, our observations can probe timescales
of hours, days, and months. A time series observation over
3.7 hours was performed on the night of 17 August 2021
(COMM4). During the time series, the airmass of the star
changed from 1.1 to 2.2. The IWV at zenith was nearly constant,
with a mean value of 2.6 mm. This resulted in strong telluric
lines, especially towards the end of the night. The wind speed at
the ground on this night was close to zero. Even with the impact
of strong telluric lines, which are harder to model (see Sect. 2.1),
an rms of 3 m/s is reached (Fig. 8 bottom). This is slightly worse
Article number, page 11 of 14

<<<PAGE 12>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
Fig. 11. Telluric Doppler shifts obtained for one spectral order (22730 - 22870 Å), where the telluric lines dominate and nearly no stellar lines
are present. Left: Telluric Doppler shifts as a function of time (same colour coding as in the previous plots). The rms of the 134 measurements is
11.7 m/s. Right: Telluric Doppler shift obtained from the time series observations of GJ 588 from June 2021. The rms of the 25 measurements is
6 m/s over a time range of around 3.75 hours.
Fig. 12. RVs for the standard star sample observed without the gas cell
as a function of time (colour coding as in previous plots). Telluric lines
serve as the wavelength reference.
than what was obtained over a similar time range for GJ 588.
This shows the impact of the weather conditions as well as of
the stellar line density. However, we cannot distinguish the con-
tribution of the different factors. Again, the correlation between
the RV trend and airmass or IWV is weak, with Pearson correla-
tion coefficients below 0.3.
Besides the high cadence time series, GJ 784 was observed
for another nine times for three nights in COMM4, reaching a
precision of 2.56 m /s (Fig. 7). During COMM3 just two obser-
vations within one night were taken (rms= 0.8 m/s). On the long
timescale, GJ 784 has an RV scatter of 5 m/s over 28 months. For
all our observations of GJ 784, we obtain an average S /N value
of 314 and a corresponding predicted precision limit of 2.6 m/s.
5.3. Stability of atmospheric lines
As mentioned in Sect. 2.1, viper allows the telluric Doppler
shift to be a variable parameter, under the premise of existing
cell lines. The following results were obtained from the same
observations, which already have been used to calculate the stel-
lar RVs. This time, we were not interested in the stellar, but
the telluric Doppler shifts, which are a by-product of the mod-
elling process in viper. We selected one spectral order (22 730–
22 870 Å) with dominant tellurics and gas cell lines but hardly
any stellar lines. For the remaining orders, we measured shifts
with a larger scatter due to the blending of the stellar lines.
In the left panel of Fig. 11, the telluric Doppler shifts are
plotted for 134 observations. Over 31 months the telluric lines
show an overall variation of 11.7 m /s around a mean o ffset of
250 m/s. For the inter-night telluric shifts, we get a variation of
6 m/s from the 3.7 h time series observation of GJ 588 (right
panel of Fig. 11). All of this is in good agreement with the results
reported by Figueira et al. (2010a), who measured with HARPS
a variation of 10 m/s around a zero offset of 222 m/s. This agree-
ment shows that the atmospheric lines in the NIR (mainly CH 4
in the selected order) are as stable as the O 2 lines in the optical.
The difference of the zero-offset between our results and those of
Figueira et al. (2010a) might be explained by di fferent species,
wavelength ranges, times, locations, and weather conditions.
The HITRAN database (Rothman et al. 2013), which is used
by the LBLRTM, gives the line positions for a pressure of 1 atm.
Wavelength shifts caused by pressure variations are not applied
to the synthetic spectra that we used for viper.
Article number, page 12 of 14

<<<PAGE 13>>>
J. Köhler et al.: viper: High-precision radial velocities from the optical to the infrared
5.4. RV precision using tellurics as the wavelength reference
For most science studies, observations with a gas cell are used
to obtain high-precision RVs. But there are some cases where
it could be helpful to get RVs from observations taken without
a cell. For instance, faint stars are normally observed without
the cell to maximise the S /N. Further, such an approach would
enable an RV study of observations of other science projects,
where the contamination by cell lines is not desired (e.g. in the
study of planetary atmospheres).
Since the CRIRES+ spectrograph is not stabilised to a level
needed for precise RV measurements, an improper wavelength
correction would lead to instrumental drifts up to 1 km/s. Taking
advantage of the telluric forward modelling as offered by viper,
the telluric lines can be used as reference. As shown above, these
are stable down to around 10 m/s, which is a substantial improve-
ment over traditional wavelength calibration.viper is one of the
few RV codes that allow forward modelling using telluric lines
alone as the wavelength calibration.
To assess the RV precision reachable with wavelength cal-
ibration based solely on the telluric lines, we re-analysed our
sample of RV stars. Since on most nights observations were
made with and without the cell, we have a sample of no-cell
observations at hand. The modelling within viper follows the
same procedure as described above, just without the modelling
of the cell lines. Furthermore, the wavelengths of the telluric
lines are fixed (meaning no telluric Doppler shift is applied) as
they serve as the wavelength reference.
The RV variations are plotted in Fig. 12 and listed in Table 1
(rmsCR+(vstar, no cell)), together with the variations of the tel-
luric Doppler shifts (rms CR+(vatm, cell)). As mentioned before,
the telluric Doppler shifts have been obtained from observations
using the cell. In most cases, observations with and without the
gas cell were taken within a few minutes of one another.
This time the RV precision varies between 10 and 16 m /s,
or about two to three times worse compared to the RV precision
of the gas cell observations. Nevertheless, with the telluric lines
being stable down to 10 m/s, this is consistent with expectations.
Since the telluric lines are most stable, down to 7 m/s, for the
observations of GJ 588 and GJ 784, we expect the RV precision
to be the best for these targets, as is the case. The best RV preci-
sion of 9.89 m/s is obtained from the 37 observations of GJ 588.
We get a comparable RV precision of 10.89 m/s for the 46 obser-
vations of GJ 784, even though this star has shown the largest RV
scatter for the gas cell observations. For the 21 observations of
GJ 447, we reach a precision of 12.56 m/s. The worst precision,
with a value of 15.57 m/s, is obtained for the 29 observations of
GJ 229A. This can be explained by the strong variations of the
telluric Doppler shifts during the observations of this star (see
Fig. 11).
6. Known problems and outlook
Although viper performs well, we plan to further improve the
code by addressing open issues. One area would be a better mod-
elling of the atmosphere lines and the IP. Even if the telluric
modelling works well, especially for the telluric standard stars,
we face problems for the telluric correction of some M dwarfs
observations. This can lead for example to strong residuals or
an incorrect wavelength solution. Despite the fact that these are
seen in only a few spectra, and most are averaged out when com-
bining several spectra to produce the template, an improvement
of the atmosphere model is under investigation. One aim is to
include an option to model the changes of the telluric line pro-
files. Profile changes are expected to be introduced due to pres-
sure variations or low-elevation observations, which can lead to
asymmetric line profiles (Smette et al. 2015; Allart et al. 2022).
Apart from this, a correct parameterisation of the IP used
in the modelling is essential (Endl et al. 2000; Hatzes 2019).
Asymmetries of the IP profile can create RV shifts that are not
real, but falsely can be interpreted as a planetary signal. viper
already offers a number of different IP profiles, but tests are still
ongoing to improve the results and maybe come up with further
methods.
Whereas the telluric forward modelling was mainly used and
tested for observations in the NIR, the idea is to extend this
method to shorter wavelengths, down to the optical region. Here
this technique would enable us to use parts of the spectrum not
covered by iodine cell lines. For instruments operating in the op-
tical, just half of the observed spectral range is covered by the
iodine cell spectrum, leaving the rest unused.
Another extension regarding usable wavelength ranges has to
be done for the CRIRES+ instrument itself. The results presented
here were using observations in the K band. Nevertheless, as the
gas cell also covers the H band, and telluric lines are present all
over the entire NIR range, the next step would be to investigate
the RV precision apart from the K band. Finally, as a long-term
goal we wish to extend theviper support to more spectrographs.
7. Summary
We have demonstrated that it is possible to apply a simple tel-
luric forward model to reach an RV precision down to 3 m /s
with CRIRES + in the K band over timescales of 2.5 years for
bright M dwarfs using a gas cell. While most telluric correc-
tion codes require modelling of many layers of the Earth’s atmo-
sphere, viper works with synthetic spectra and scaling expo-
nents, plus a parameter for telluric Doppler shifts. Thanks to this
simple model, viper needs only a few seconds of processing
time and is therefore faster than other available telluric correc-
tion codes. Apart from that, all processing – from the creation of
a telluric-free stellar template to the determination of RV values
– can be done without any additional correction codes.
Using observations from CRIRES +, we have demonstrated
that viper is able to successfully model telluric lines in the NIR.
For the example of a telluric standard star, we obtain rms val-
ues between 0.6% and 1% for the corrected spectrum depending
on the strength of telluric lines. Nevertheless, it should be men-
tioned that viper, just like any other correction code, is not able
to model saturated lines correctly. With observations distributed
over a longer time period, residuals from the correction can be
reduced or even be removed via the co-adding of several spectra,
as shown in the example of the M dwarf GJ 588.
We used viper on a number of RV standard stars observed
with CRIRES + over a time span of more than 2.5 years. An
RV precision of around 2 m /s was reached on short to medium
timescales of hours, days, and weeks. The best long-term RV
precision of 3 m /s was reached for the M2.5 star GJ 588 over
a time range of 26 months. In our sample, GJ 588 is the star
with the lowest RV variation in the optical as well. For the rest
of the sample, precision values between 4 m /s and 5 m /s were
obtained on long timescales. This shows that CRIRES+ is a suit-
able instrument for high-precision RV measurements in the NIR.
viper is the officially recommended RV pipeline for CRIRES+
data, and the user has an easy and fast tool at hand to process the
data. The code comes with a manual and demo data.
In addition, we have studied the stability of telluric lines in
the NIR, confirming the variation of around 10 m /s already re-
Article number, page 13 of 14

<<<PAGE 14>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa53919-25
ported in other studies, including Figueira et al. (2010a). Fur-
thermore, we calculated RV values for observations performed
without the use of a gas cell. Applying the forward modelling
using only telluric lines as the wavelength reference, we were
able to obtain an RV precision down to 10 m/s on a timescale of
more than two years, which is in full agreement with the stability
of the telluric lines.
In this paper only results from CRIRES + have been pre-
sented. Nevertheless, viper produces good results for other in-
struments as well (Khandelwal et al. 2022; Šubjak et al. 2022;
Kabáth et al. 2022; Karjalainen et al. 2022).
Acknowledgements. Based on observations collected at the European Or-
ganisation for Astronomical Research in the Southern Hemisphere under
ESO programmes 60.A.-9051, 108.22CH.001, 109.23FA.001, 110.2447.001,
111.24SC.002, and 112.25VY .002. CRIRES+ is an ESO upgrade project carried
out by Thüringer Landessternwarte Tautenburg, Georg-August Universität Göt-
tingen, and Uppsala University. The project is founded by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (Germany) through Grants 05A11MG3, 05A14MG14,
05A17MG2 and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. J.K. and A.H.
acknowledge financial support from ESO and grant HA 3279 /15-1 from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). O.K. acknowledge support by the
Swedish Research Council (projects 2019-03548 and 2023-03667). We thank
all colleagues involved in the development, installation and commissioning of
CRIRES+. Further, we thank observers and sta ff at the VLT providing us with
observations and support. Acknowledgements also go to current users and testers
of viper.
References
Allart, R., Lovis, C., Faria, J., et al. 2022, A&A, 666, A196
Artigau, É., Bouchy, F., Doyon, R., et al. 2024, SPIE Conf. Ser., 13096, 130960C
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,
A33
Basant, R., Luque, R., Bean, J. L., et al. 2025, ApJ, 982, L1
Bean, J. L., Seifahrt, A., Hartman, H., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, 410
Bertaux, J. L., Lallement, R., Ferron, S., Boonne, C., & Bodichon, R. 2014,
A&A, 564, A46
Bonfils, X., Astudillo-Defru, N., Díaz, R., et al. 2018, A&A, 613, A25
Bouchy, F., Pepe, F., & Queloz, D. 2001, A&A, 374, 733
Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., Williams, E., et al. 1996, PASP, 108, 500
Cale, B., Plavchan, P., LeBrun, D., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 170
Clough, S. A. & Iacono, M. J. 1995, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 16,519
Clough, S. A., Shephard, M. W., Mlawer, E. J., et al. 2005,
J. Quant. Spectr. Rad. Transf., 91, 233
Cutri, R. M., Skrutskie, M. F., van Dyk, S., et al. 2003, VizieR Online Data Cata-
log: 2MASS All-Sky Catalog of Point Sources (Cutri+ 2003), VizieR On-line
Data Catalog: II /246. Originally published in: University of Massachusetts
and Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, (IPAC /California Institute of
Technology) (2003)
Deslières, A., Cadieux, C., Doyon, R., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 182
Dorn, R. J., Bristow, P., Smoker, J. V ., et al. 2023, A&A, 671, A24
Endl, M., Kürster, M., & Els, S. 2000, A&A, 362, 585
Feng, F., Butler, R. P., Shectman, S. A., et al. 2020, ApJS, 246, 11
Figueira, P., Pepe, F., Lovis, C., & Mayor, M. 2010a, A&A, 515, A106
Figueira, P., Pepe, F., Melo, C. H. F., et al. 2010b, A&A, 511, A55
Griffin, R. & Griffin, R. 1973, MNRAS, 162, 255
Gullikson, K., Dodson-Robinson, S., & Kraus, A. 2014, AJ, 148, 53
Hatzes, A. P. 2019, The Doppler Method for the Detection of Exoplanets
Hirano, T., Kuzuhara, M., Kotani, T., et al. 2020, PASJ, 72, 93
Husser, T. O., Wende-von Berg, S., Dreizler, S., et al. 2013, A&A, 553, A6
Jones, E., Oliphant, T., & Peterson, P. 2001, SciPy: Open Source Scientific Tools
for Python
Kabáth, P., Chaturvedi, P., MacQueen, P. J., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 513, 5955
Karjalainen, M., Karjalainen, R., Hatzes, A. P., et al. 2022, A&A, 668, A26
Kesseli, A. Y ., Kirkpatrick, J. D., Fajardo-Acosta, S. B., et al. 2019, VizieR
Online Data Catalog: Radius relations for low-metallicity M-dwarf stars
(Kesseli+, 2019), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: J/AJ/157/63. Originally pub-
lished in: 2019AJ....157...63K
Khandelwal, A., Chaturvedi, P., Chakraborty, A., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 509, 3339
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Henry, T. J., & McCarthy, Jr., D. W. 1991, ApJS, 77, 417
Kuerster, M., Schmitt, J. H. M. M., Cutispoto, G., & Dennerl, K. 1997, A&A,
320, 831
Leet, C., Fischer, D. A., & Valenti, J. A. 2019, AJ, 157, 187
Nagel, E., Czesla, S., Kaminski, A., et al. 2023, A&A, 680, A73
Pepe, F., Cristiani, S., Rebolo, R., et al. 2021, A&A, 645, A96
Rothman, L. S., Gordon, I. E., Babikov, Y ., et al. 2013,
J. Quant. Spectr. Rad. Transf., 130, 4
Seemann, U., Anglada-Escude, G., Baade, D., et al. 2014, SPIE Conf. Ser., 9147,
91475G
Smette, A., Sana, H., Noll, S., et al. 2015, A&A, 576, A77
Torres, C. A. O., Quast, G. R., da Silva, L., et al. 2006, A&A, 460, 695
Trifonov, T., Tal-Or, L., Zechmeister, M., et al. 2020, VizieR Online Data Cata-
log: HARPS radial velocity database (Trifonov+, 2020), VizieR On-line Data
Catalog: J/A+A/636/A74. Originally published in: 2020A&A...636A..74T
Tuomi, M., Jones, H. R. A., Barnes, J. R., Anglada-Escudé, G., & Jenkins, J. S.
2014, MNRAS, 441, 1545
Šubjak, J., Endl, M., Chaturvedi, P., et al. 2022, A&A, 662, A107
Walker, A. R. 1983, South African Astronomical Observatory Circular, 7, 106
Wang, S. X., Latouf, N., Plavchan, P., et al. 2022, AJ, 164, 211
Wright, J. T. & Eastman, J. D. 2014, PASP, 126, 838
Xuan, J. W., Mérand, A., Thompson, W., et al. 2024, Nature, 634, 1070
Zechmeister, M., Köhler, J., & Chamarthi, S. 2021, viper: Velocity and IP Esti-
matoR, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2108.006
Zechmeister, M. & Kürster, M. 2009, A&A, 496, 577
Article number, page 14 of 14