<<<PAGE 1>>>
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb ©ESO 2021
March 9, 2021
The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE)
II. Observations, Data reduction and analysis, Detection performances and
early-results
M. Langlois1, 2, R. Gratton3, A.-M. Lagrange4, 5, P. Delorme4, A. Boccaletti5, M. Bonnefoy4, A.-L. Maire7, 6, D. Mesa3,
G. Chauvin4, 20, S. Desidera3, A. Vigan2, A. Cheetham8, J. Hagelberg8, M. Feldt6, M. Meyer9, 10, P. Rubini, H. Le
Coroller2, F. Cantalloube6, B. Biller6, 12, 13, M. Bonavita11, T. Bhowmik5, W. Brandner6, S. Daemgen10, V . D’Orazi3, O.
Flasseur1, C. Fontanive13,3, R. Galicher5, J. Girard4, P. Janin-Potiron5, M. Janson28,6, M. Keppler6, T. Kopytova6,30,29,
E. Lagadec14, J. Lannier4, C. Lazzoni27, R. Ligi14, N. Meunier4, A. Perreti8, C. Perrot5,24,25, L. Rodet4, C. Romero4,16,
D. Rouan5, M. Samland28,6, G. Salter2, E. Sissa3, T. Schmidt5, A. Zurlo17, 18, 2, D. Mouillet4, L. Denis26, E. Thiébaut1,
J. Milli4, Z. Wahhaj16, J.-L. Beuzit2, C. Dominik19, Th. Henning6, F. Ménard4, A. Müller6, H.M. Schmid10, M.
Turatto3, S. Udry8, L. Abe14, J. Antichi3, F. Allard1 A. Baruﬀolo3, P. Baudoz5, J. Baudrand5, A. Bazzon10,
P. Blanchard2, M. Carbillet14, M. Carle2, E. Cascone3, J. Charton4, R. Claudi3, A. Costille2, V . De Caprio23,
A. Delboulbé4, K. Dohlen2, D. Fantinel3, P. Feautrier4, T. Fusco21, 2, P. Gigan5, E. Giro3, D. Gisler10, L. Gluck4,
C. Gry2, N. Hubin15, E. Hugot2, M. Jaquet2, M. Kasper15, 4, D. Le Mignant2, M. Llored2, F. Madec2, Y . Magnard4,
P. Martinez14, D. Maurel4, S. Messina31, O. Möller-Nilsson21, L. Mugnier21, T. Moulin4, A. Origné2, A. Pavlov6,
D. Perret5, C. Petit21, J. Pragt4, P. Puget4, P. Rabou4, J. Ramos4, F. Rigal4, S. Rochat4, R. Roelfsema22, G. Rousset5,
A. Roux4, B. Salasnich3, J.-F. Sauvage21, 2, A. Sevin5, C. Soenke15, E. Stadler4, M. Suarez15, L. Weber8, and F. Wildi8
E. Rickman8
(Aﬃliations can be found after the references)
Received ???; accepted ???
ABSTRACT
Context. Over the past decades, direct imaging has conﬁrmed the existence of substellar companions (exoplanets or brown dwarfs) on wide orbits
(>10 au) from their host stars. To understand their formation and evolution mechanisms, we have initiated in 2015 the SPHERE infrared survey
for exoplanets (SHINE), a systematic direct imaging survey of young, nearby stars to explore their demographics.
Aims. We aim to detect and characterize the population of giant planets and brown dwarfs beyond the snow line around young, nearby stars.
Combined with the survey completeness, our observations oﬀer the opportunity to constrain the statistical properties (occurrence, mass and orbital
distributions, dependency on the stellar mass) of these young giant planets.
Methods. In this study, we present the observing and data analysis strategy, the ranking process of the detected candidates, and the survey perfor-
mances for a subsample of 150 stars, which are representative of the full SHINE sample. The observations were conducted in an homogeneous
way from February 2015 to February 2017 with the dedicated ground-based VLT/SPHERE instrument equipped with the IFS integral ﬁeld spectro-
graph and the IRDIS dual-band imager covering a spectral range between 0.9 and 2.3µm. We used coronographic, angular and spectral diﬀerential
imaging techniques to reach the best detection performances for this study down to the planetary mass regime.
Results. We have processed in a uniform manner more than 300 SHINE observations and datasets to assess the survey typical sensitivity as a
function of the host star, and of the observing conditions. The median detection performance reaches 5 σ-contrasts of 13 mag at 200 mas and
14.2 mag at 800 mas with the IFS (YJ and YJH bands), and of 11.8 mag at 200 mas, 13.1 mag at 800 mas and 15.8 mag at 3 as with IRDIS in H
band, delivering one of the deepest sensitivity surveys so far for young nearby stars. A total of sixteen substellar companions were imaged in this
ﬁrst part of SHINE: seven brown dwarf companions, and ten planetary-mass companions. They include the two new discoveries HIP 65426 b and
HIP 64892 B, but not the planets around PDS70 not originally select in the SHINE core sample. A total of 1483 candidates were detected, mainly
in the large ﬁeld-of-view of IRDIS. Color-magnitude diagrams, low-resolution spectrum when available with IFS, and follow-up observations,
enabled to identify the nature (background contaminant or comoving companion) of about 86 % of them. The remaining cases are often connected
to crowded ﬁeld missing follow-up observations. Finally, although SHINE was not designed for disk searches, twelve circumstellar disks were
imaged including three new detections around the HIP 73145, HIP 86598 and HD 106906 systems.
Conclusions. Nowadays, direct imaging brings a unique opportunity to probe the outer part of exoplanetary systems beyond 10 au to explore
planetary architectures as highlighted by the discoveries of one new exoplanet, one new brown dwarf companion, and three new debris disks
during this early phase of SHINE. It also o ﬀers the opportunity to explore and revisit the physical and orbital properties of these young giant
planets and brown dwarf companions (relative position, photometry and low-resolution spectrum in near-infrared, predicted masses, contrast to
search for additional companions). Finally, these results highlight the importance to ﬁnalize the SHINE systematic observation of about 500 young,
nearby stars, for a full exploration of their outer part to explore the demographics of young giant planets beyond 10 au, and to nail down the most
interesting systems for the next generation of high-contrast imagers on very large and extremely large telescopes.
Key words. instrumentation: adaptive optics – instrumentation: high angular resolution – planets and satellites: detection – Techniques: high
angular resolution – Infrared: planetary systems – (Stars): planetary systems –
Article number, page 1 of 30
arXiv:2103.03976v1  [astro-ph.EP]  5 Mar 2021

<<<PAGE 2>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Article number, page 2 of 30

<<<PAGE 3>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
1. Introduction and context
The discovery of the ﬁrst brown dwarf companion Gl 229 B ben-
eﬁted from the combined technological innovation of infrared
detectors and high contrast techniques (Nakajima et al. 1995).
Following this discovery, the ﬁrst generation of dedicated planet
imagers on 10-m class telescopes (NaCo at VLT, NIRC2 at Keck,
NICI at Gemini) conducted systematic surveys of young and
nearby stars. They led the ﬁrst direct detections of planetary
mass companions in the early 2000’s. These companions were
detected at distances larger than several hundreds astronomical
units (au) and/or with a mass ratio not much smaller than a tenth
with respect to their host primaries (except for brown dwarf pri-
maries), giving hints of formation via gravo-turbulent fragmen-
tation (Hennebelle & Chabrier 2011) or gravitational disk insta-
bility (Boss 1997). Thanks to the improvement of direct imag-
ing observation and data analysis techniques with ground-based
adaptive optics systems (AO) or space telescopes, a few plan-
etary mass objects and low-mass brown dwarfs have been de-
tected since the ﬁrst detection by Chauvin et al. (2004). More-
over, these developments, enabled the discoveries of giant plan-
ets within 100 au around young, nearby, and dusty early type
stars like HR8799 b,c,d,e (Marois et al. 2008, 2010),β Pictoris b
(Lagrange et al. 2009), and more recently HD 95086 b (Rameau
et al. 2013a), and GJ 504 b (Kuzuhara et al. 2013a).
Direct imaging is the only viable technique to probe for plan-
ets at large separations with single epoch observations, but de-
tecting them requires to overcome the di ﬃculties caused by the
angular proximity and the high contrast involved. With improved
instruments and data reduction techniques, we are currently ini-
tiating the characterization of the giant planet population at wide
orbits, between typically 10-100 au. More than a decade of direct
imaging surveys targeting several hundred young, nearby stars
have lead to the discovery of approximately a dozen sub-stellar
companions excluding the companions to brown dwarfs located
in the star vicinity (within 100 au). Despite the relatively small
number of discoveries compared with other techniques, such as
radial velocity and transit, each new imaged giant planet has pro-
vided unique clues on the formation, evolution and physics of
young massive Jupiters.
Early surveys performed using the ﬁrst generation of planet
imagers enabled to conduct systematic surveys relatively mod-
est in size sampling each less than hundreds of young nearby
stars (Chauvin et al. 2018). Various strategies were followed
for the target selection of these surveys: i / complete census
of given associations (Chauvin et al. 2003; Masciadri et al.
2005; Kasper et al. 2007; Chauvin et al. 2010), ii / selection
of young, intermediate-mass stars (Janson et al. 2011; Rameau
et al. 2013b; Nielsen et al. 2013), iii/ or very low-mass stars (De-
lorme et al. 2012; Chauvin et al. 2012; Bowler et al. 2015; Lan-
nier et al. 2016), iv / application of ﬁgures of merit considering
detection rate with toy models of planet population (Biller et al.
2013). Numerous direct imaging surveys to detect giant planet
companions have reported null-detections (Masciadri et al. 2005;
Kasper et al. 2007; Chauvin et al. 2010; Biller et al. 2007;
Lafrenière et al. 2007; Ehrenreich et al. 2010; Chauvin et al.
2010; Janson et al. 2011; Delorme et al. 2012), but this allowed
to set upper limits to the occurrence of giant planets.
Ongoing surveys target several hundreds stars, with the
largest surveys to date due to be completed in the next years.
SpHere INfrared survey for Exoplanets (SHINE, Chauvin et al.
2017b), Gemini GPIES (Macintosh et al. 2015) and SCExAO
(Jovanovic et al. 2016) now combine dedicated extreme adaptive
optics systems with coronagraphic and both angular and spectral
diﬀerential image processing. With enhanced detection perfor-
mances, the objective is to signiﬁcantly increase the number of
imaged planets to characterize, but also to provide better statisti-
cal constraints on the occurrence and the characteristics of exo-
planets at wide orbits (>10 au). This should give us a more global
picture of planetary systems architecture at all orbits to improve
our understanding of planetary formation and evolution mecha-
nisms. Early-results already conﬁrm the gain in terms of detec-
tion performances compared with the ﬁrst generation of planet
imagers (Nielsen et al. 2019; Vigan et al. 2020).
The near-infrared wavelengths (H and K-bands) have been
used intensively. They are a good compromise between low-
background noise, high angular resolution and good Strehl cor-
rection. However, thermal imaging at L or M-bands has been
very competitive in terms of detection performances as the
planet-star contrast and the Strehl correction are more favorable
in those wavelengths despite an increased thermal background
and larger inner working angle. For instance, SPHERE could be
in some cases less sensitive than NaCo for the detection of giant
planets around young, nearby M dwarfs at typical separations
larger than 500-1000 mas.
Both SHINE and GPIES surveys have recently discovered
three new exoplanets (Macintosh et al. 2015; Chauvin et al.
2017b; Keppler et al. 2018), and a few additional higher mass
brown dwarfs (Konopacky et al. 2016; Cheetham et al. 2018).
Smaller surveys using SPHERE and GPI also discovered several
substellar companions (Milli et al. 2017a; Wagner et al. 2020;
Bohn et al. 2020). They oﬀer unprecedented detection, astromet-
ric and spectrophotometric capabilities which allow us to charac-
terize fainter and closer giant planets, such as the recent discov-
ery of 51 Eri b (2 MJup at 14 au, T5-type, of age 20 Myr; Mac-
intosh et al. 2015; Samland et al. 2017), HIP 65426 b, a young,
warm, and dusty L5-L7 massive jovian planet located at about
92 au from its host star (Chauvin et al. 2017b), and the young
solar analogue PDS 70 now known to actually host two plan-
ets PDS 70 b discovered during the SHINE campaign (Keppler
et al. 2018; Müller et al. 2018) and PDS 70 c by MUSE (Haf-
fert et al. 2018). Such surveys also provide key spectral and or-
bital characterisation data for known exoplanets (e.g. De Rosa
et al. 2016; Samland et al. 2017; Chauvin et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2018; Cheetham et al. 2019; Lagrange et al. 2019; Maire
et al. 2019). Despite these new discoveries, SHINE and GPIES
have yielded signiﬁcantly fewer exoplanet detections than pre-
dicted using extrapolations of radial velocity planet populations
to larger semi-major axes (e.g. Cumming et al. 2008). This re-
sults in setting strong statistical constraints on the distribution of
giant exoplanets at separations >10 au from their stars, as well
as sub-stellar companions to young stars (Nielsen et al. 2019;
Vigan et al. 2020). As these systems are young (<100 Myr), and
thus closer to their epoch of formation than for instance radial
velocity planets (typically 1–10 Gyr), statistical analysis of large
direct-imaging surveys can provide hints into the potential for-
mation mechanism responsible for producing giant exoplanets
orbiting at wide orbits.
This paper is part of a series of three papers describing
early results obtained from analysis of a subset of the SHINE
data. This paper describes the observations, data quality, analy-
sis methods, and presents results in terms of detections and upper
limits for this subset of SHINE data. Two associated papers de-
scribe the general characteristics of the survey sample (Desidera
et al. submitted) and the statistical analysis and a discussion of
the implication for formation scenarios (Vigan et al. 2020).
Following this introduction, we present in section 2 the ob-
servations that were performed to underpin this work. In Sect. 3,
Article number, page 3 of 30

<<<PAGE 4>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
we describe the reduction and calibration of the data sets. Sec-
tion 4 is dedicated to the main results of the survey, including
the detection limits of the survey. Finally, we summarize, in Sect
5, the characterization of newly discovered and known substellar
companions along with a description of the circumstellar disks
detected within the survey data. The conclusions and prospects
are drawn in section 7. The relative astrometry and photometry
of companion candidates from the sample is listed in Annex A.
2. The SHINE survey
The SpHere INfrared survey for Exoplanets (SHINE: Chauvin
et al. 2017a) has been designed for 200 telescope nights, allo-
cated in visitor mode, using the SPHERE consortium guaran-
teed time. SHINE has been designed by the SPHERE consor-
tium to: (i) identify and characterized new planetary and brown
dwarf companions; (ii) study the architecture of planetary sys-
tems (multiplicity and dynamical interactions); (iii) investigate
the link between the presence of planets and disks (in synergy
with the GTO program aimed at disk characterization); (iv) de-
termine the frequency of giant planets beyond 10 au; (v) investi-
gate the impact of stellar mass (and even age if possible) on the
frequency and characteristics of planetary companions over the
range 0.5 to 3.0 M⊙.
The SHINE survey started in February 2015 and will be com-
pleted in mid-2021, with observations of 500 targets out of a
larger sample of 800 nearby young stars aiming at searching for
new sub-stellar companions. The sample is oversized with re-
spect to the available telescope time by a factor of approximately
two, on the basis of the adopted observing strategy, which re-
lies on observations surrounding meridian passage in order to
achieve the maximum ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) rotation for optimal
angular diﬀerential imaging. This requires some ﬂexibility in the
target list in order to optimize the scheduling.
The general design of the survey, the sample selection and
the simulations performed for building it, the parameters of the
individual targets used in this early statistical analysis, and the
general properties of the sample used in this series of papers are
described in detail in Desidera et al. (submitted). We describe
in this paper early results obtained from the analysis of about a
third of the large SHINE survey sample, considering only those
targets whose ﬁrst observations were done before Feb 2017.Sev-
eral second epochs observations were also performed between
2016 and 2019 to discriminate companions from background
stars on the selected sample described in this paper. This selected
sample dataset including 150 targets, is already large enough for
reviewing the survey eﬃciency, to discuss the incidence of mas-
sive planets at a separation> 10 au, and to have new indications
about the formation scenarios for giant planets.
2.1. Observations setup
All the observations were performed with the Spectro-
Polarimeter High-contrast Exoplanet REsearch (SPHERE;
Beuzit et al. 2019) combining its SAXO extreme adaptive optics
system (Fusco et al. 2006; Sauvage et al. 2016; Fusco et al. 2014)
and its apodized pupil Lyot coronagraphs (Boccaletti et al. 2008;
Carbillet et al. 2011; Guerri et al. 2011). Observations were ac-
quired in either IRDIFS or IRDIFS-EXT mode, i.e. with both
NIR sub-systems, IFS (Claudi et al. 2008) and IRDIS (Dohlen
et al. 2008), observing in parallel (Zurlo et al. 2014; Mesa et al.
2015). The IFS covers a 1.7 ′′×1.7′′ FoV and IRDIS covers a
more or less circular, unvignetted FoV of diameter ∼9′′. The
APLC_YJHs and APLC_Ks coronagraphic conﬁgurations were
used for the IRDIFS and IRDIFS-EXT observations respectively,
and in IRDIS all ﬁrst epoch observations were performed with
the DB-H23 and DB-K12 dual-band ﬁlter pairs (Vigan et al.
2010). Due to the presence of known companions and/or the de-
tection of (new) candidate companions, some targets were ob-
served multiple times for astrometric monitoring. In addition
to the initial selected ﬁlters, follow-up observations were per-
formed in diﬀerent conﬁgurations with IRDIS, for example with
the broad-band BB-H and dual-band DB-J23 ﬁlters, as listed in
the ﬁlter column of Table 1. This resulted in a varying number
of observations for each target.
2.2. Observations Optimized planning: SPOT
Given the large number of targets, each associated with a prior-
ity and an urgency (how soon the observation has to be made),
and the various observing constrains, including those connected
to Angular Diﬀerential Imaging (ADI: Marois et al. 2006) obser-
vations, we built a dedicated tool, SPOT, to deliver an optimised
scheduling of the observations, both on long and short terms.
SPOT is based on simulated annealing. It is described in in de-
tails in Lagrange et al. (2016).
In brief, SPOT uses as inputs the calendar of allocated ob-
serving nights, the list of targets available for e.g. the whole
semester, together with their associated instrumental set up (that
is associated with speciﬁc overheads) and any speciﬁc schedul-
ing constrains (needed for second epoch observations), the tar-
gets coordinates and magnitude, the minimal coronagraphic ex-
position duration, the maximum air mass, the maximum propor-
tion (in time) of the observation that is allowed either before
or after the meridian crossing, the minimum exposure time, the
amount of FoV rotation during the observation. It must be noted
that the amount of FoV rotation depends on the target coordi-
nates and on the actual time and duration of observations. As it
also drives the exposure time, we also set a maximum exposition
time, to avoid extending too much the duration of the exposure.
Classical, additional scheduling constraints are applied on
all targets: minimal angular distance to the Moon, avoidance of
zenith observations. Poor atmospheric conditions may also be
taken into account through pointing restrictions that usually de-
pend on the wind direction and speed and through magnitude re-
strictions in case of non photometric conditions. Finally, SPOT
also takes into account the various overheads and the need for
astrometric and spectro-photometric calibrations. The astromet-
ric calibrations were to be observed as much as possible in the
ﬁrst night of each run, and the spectro-photometric in the fol-
lowing night. After optimisation SPOT returns a schedule, and
produces the Observing Blocks (OBs) that can be automatically
transferred to P2 (the ESO observing preparation tool).
In practice, we generally request the coronagraphic data to be
obtained while the target is crossing the meridian at least 15 min
before and after the meridian passage, and with at least 30 de-
grees of FoV rotation, unless it required more than 7200 s. The
minimum exposure time was set to 3600 s. The scheduling of
the targets was always optimal; the eﬃciency of the night could
be as high as 100% when typically 2-3 time more targets were
available than actually those scheduled. Yet, when not enough
targets were available as inputs, short (typically 30 min) holes
could be present in the schedules during the nights. These holes
were used to observe ﬁllers requiring short exposure times (bi-
naries, stars with RV trends, astrometric and spectrophotometric
standards). By comparing with other surveys executed in service
such as BEAST (Janson et al., in preparation), we conclude that
use of SPOT allowed an increase of more than 30% in the ﬁeld
Article number, page 4 of 30

<<<PAGE 5>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
rotation angles for identical observing time with respect to the
service scheduling routinely used at ESO.
2.3. Observing conditions and Data quality
The SPHERE Instruments are fed by an extreme adaptive optics
(AO) system called SAXO. It delivers a very high Strehl ratio,
which reaches above 90% in H-band for very good observing
conditions by correcting both perturbations induced by the at-
mospheric turbulence and from the internal aberrations of the
instrument itself. A comprehensive description of the SAXO de-
sign can be found in Fusco et al. (2016) and Beuzit et al. (2019).
We derived here the overall statistical AO telemetry data from
SAXO and from the ESO MASS-DIMM measurements for the
survey observations and relate these parameters to the Strehl ra-
tio, raw contrast and processed contrast in order to evaluate the
performance constraints from these observations. The telemetry
data points are spread over 130 di ﬀerent nights and cover more
than 200 di ﬀerent observations. The AO telemetry data (avail-
able for a large number of our survey observations) includes es-
timates from the real-time computer (called SPARTA) several
quantities of interest that could be related to the ﬁnal perfor-
mances (hereafter SPARTA data) such as: the Strehl ratio and
additional atmospheric parameters including the seeing and the
coherence time. The Strehl is deﬁned at 1.6µm, while the seeing
and coherence time are deﬁned at 500 nm.
These quantities are also connected here with the brightness
of the target (V and H magnitudes), retrieved from the Simbad
database, and used as a proxy in V-Band for the number of pho-
tons received by the WFS 1. The distribution in magnitude for
the sample considered here (for targets with telemetry measure-
ments) is shown in Fig. 1 (Bottom Right). It illustrates the fact
that our target selection as described in Desidera et al. (submit-
ted) was based on setting a magnitude limit (V<12.5) in order to
guarantee good AO performances. Our sample selection criteria
also favors red targets leading to the faintest H-band observa-
tions to be below 8 magnitude.
The overall good AO performance for the selected range of
target brightness is conﬁrmed by the Strehl measurements shown
in Fig. 1 (bottom left). This Figure shows the distribution of the
Strehl ratio as a function of the star magnitude in V-band where
the median Strehl is greater than 70% averaging around 80% in
moderate seeing conditions. This Figure also shows a decrease
in the Strehl beyond magnitude 7. The blue data points, repre-
senting coherence time smaller than 3 ms, highlight the impact
of short coherence time on the performances with Strehl ratio
below 80%. It is suggested in Milli et al. (2017b) that the Strehl
or its estimation could be a ﬀected by the small number of pho-
tons reaching the WFS (for 7.5 - 9 magnitude guide stars) while
the AO loop is operating at full speed, wich could explain the
strehl decrease around magnitude 8. For fainter stars, a slower
AO loop frequency of 600 Hz is used in order to still collect a
suﬃcient number of photons per AO cycle for high-order wave-
front determination and correction.
This hypothesis is supported further by the greater decrease
in Strehl for the low coherence time data points which explain
most of the performance inﬂection around V =8 magnitude. The
1 For stars with a magnitude R< 10 (value read from the SPHERE ac-
quisition template), the WFS arm uses a red ﬁlter called LP_780 block-
ing wavelengths below 780nm. As a result the central wavelength of the
WFS arm is shifted to redder wavelengths, approximately 850 nm, and
the nearest broadband ﬁlter is the I ﬁlter ( λc = 806nm, ∆λ = 149nm).
However, not all stars have a measurement of their I magnitude in Sim-
bad, we therefore used the V mag which is most commonly available.
large scatter in the Strehl distributions indicates that the seeing
is also, as expected, a parameter inﬂuencing the Strehl among
others such asτ0 and the star magnitude. Despite this large scat-
ter the (Top Left) plot from the same Figure shows a linear de-
crease trend of the Strehl with the seeing. This decrease is on av-
erage 1.8% Strehl for an increase in seeing of 0.1” which is sim-
ilar to the Strehl behavior versus seeing obtained by Milli et al.
(2017b) when correction is applied according to the SPARTA
versus DIMM measurements dependency. While the SPARTA
seeing provides an estimate which is closer to the image quality
in the science frames, it has been shown that the SPARTA see-
ing estimations are smaller than the ESO DIMM measurements,
a fact that may be accounted for the turbulence outer scale. The
overall impact of the performance limitation from the seeing on
our survey is clearly important as illustrated by the large number
of observations occurring for seeing greater than 0.8” (Fig. 1 -
Top-Left).
The Top-Right part of Fig. 1 shows the distribution of the
Strehl as a function of the coherence time for our full sample.
There is a steep rise in Strehl ratio with the coherence time (for
τ0 < 3 ms) followed by plateau for larger coherence times (for
τ0 < 5 ms). This shows that for low coherence times, the AO per-
formances are limited by the temporal bandwidth error as men-
tioned in Cantalloube et al. (2020) which also derives a 3 ms
threshold from the system point of view. This is in agreement
with the laboratory and ﬁrst on-sky measurements described in
details in Petit et al. (2012). The overall impact of this perfor-
mance limitation on our survey is likely important as illustrated
by the large number of observations occurring when τ0 < 4 ms
(i.e 70% of the observations). Further analysis of the impact of
this eﬀect should include the seeing contribution in the Strehl
error budget to disentangle the seeing and coherence time corre-
lations.
Summarizing, we have shown in this section that the AO per-
formances are clearly related to the observing conditions for our
sample. We will further describe the impact of these observa-
tional parameters on the high contrast performances in section
4.
3. Data Reduction and Analysis
Large surveys such as SHINE (especially because of the large
IRDIS FoV) unveiled a large number of point sources (mainly
background sources) from which true sub-stellar mass compan-
ions need to be distinguished. For this reason, both astrome-
try and photometry of the detected points sources need to be
precisely and homogeneously calibrated and extracted to test
their companionship and charactezerize their nature. We detail
in the following sub-sections the SHINE strategy: i / to cali-
brate both IRDIS and IFS on various important aspects (dis-
torsion, plate scale, True North, parallactic angle determination,
central start position) in sub-section 3.1, ii / to pre-process the
scientiﬁc observations and apply basic reduction steps (cosmet-
ics, ﬂat, frame registration and recentering, cross-talk and wave-
length calibration) as described in sub-section 3.2, iii / to apply
advanced ADI/ASDI algorithms summarized in sub-section 3.3,
and ultimately extract the companion relative astrometry and
photometry as detailed in sub-section. The ﬁnal error budget
for both astrometry and photometry is described in this last sub-
section.
Article number, page 5 of 30

<<<PAGE 6>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Fig. 1: Observing conditions and AO performances in IRDIFS observing mode: (Top-Left) Strehl ratio as a function of the seeing
measured by SPARTA. (Top-Right) Strehl Ratio as function of the atmospheric coherence time estimated by SPARTA. A linear ﬁt
is overlaid in red on the Top ﬁgures. (Bottom-Left) Strehl ratio as function of the star V magnitude. The blue data points represent
the data taken with coherence time smaller than 3 ms.(Bottom-Right) Histogram illustrating the repartition of the observations
(including multiple observations of the same target) as function of the star magnitude in V (dark blue) and H-bands (light blue). The
apparent large number of observations of R =3.5 stars is an artiﬁcial e ﬀect due to the large number of observations targeting Beta
Pictoris.
3.1. SPHERE Calibration
3.1.1. Astrometry
We present in this section the astrometric calibration of the
SHINE survey which depends on several factors described in
detail in the following paragraphs: i/ platescale, True North and
distorsion correction, ii/ angular oﬀset (between ﬁeld and pupil-
tracking and parallactic angle correction), iii / star-centering.
This section also presents as a conclusion, iv / a sanity check of
the calibration startegy based on Gaia-DR2 results.
Platescale, T rue North and distorsion An extensive descrip-
tion of astrometry with SPHERE can be found in Maire et al.
(2016b) and Beuzit et al. (2019). For what concerns in partic-
ular the SHINE survey, the astrometric calibration consisted in
the correction for the instrument anamorphism (0.60±0.02% be-
tween the horizontal and vertical directions of the detector, i.e. 6
mas at 1 arcsec), correction for constant o ﬀset angles (between
the IFS and IRDIS ﬁelds of view, between pupil-tracking mode
and ﬁeld-tracking mode), and determination of the values for the
pixel scale and the correction to the true north. We ﬁnd small but
non negligible variations of the last quantities with time requir-
ing dedicated calibration for each observing runs. Appropriate
values were estimated for each run using several reference ﬁelds
of view in clusters with a large number of stars and having accu-
rate (sub-mas) astrometry from Hubble Space Telescope (HST)
or ground-based diﬀraction limited observations: 47 Tuc (Bellini
et al. 2014; Soto et al. 2017; Bellini et al. 2017); NGC 6380
(Bellini et al. 2011; Soto et al. 2017) and Noyola (private com-
munication); NGC 3603 (Harayama et al. 2008; Khorrami et al.
2016; Rochau et al. 2010); and Trapezium B1-B4 (Close et al.
2012, 2013) (see Figure 2).
IRDIS was used for all astrometric calibrations, because its
ﬁeld of view allows observation of a large number of stars, in
most cases between 50 and 100. Only seven stars were available
for the Trapezium B1-B4 ﬁeld, leading to a less accurate cali-
bration of the ﬁeld orientation (by 1%) and on the plate scale
(by 0.1%), and was used only when the other calibration ﬁelds
were not accessible from February 2015 to March 2016. Due to
the less good accuracy of the catalog positions for NGC 6380
and the smaller number of calibrating objects, we used this ﬁeld
only twice in May-June 2015 and once in June 2017. Using sev-
eral calibrators enable to perform calibrations throughout the
year and to do cross-calibration. Because the coronagraph has
a small eﬀect on the pixel scale, the astrometric ﬁelds were ob-
served with a coronagraphic plate (including an o ﬀset for the
Trapezium B1-B4 ﬁeld observation, to shift the B1 star out of
the coronagraphic mask).
The pixel scale is slightly di ﬀerent for the H2, H3, K1, and
K2 ﬁlters, with mean values of 12.255, 12.250, 12.267, and
12.263 mas/pixel, respectively. For IFS, we used a constant value
Article number, page 6 of 30

<<<PAGE 7>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 2: IRDIS H2 images of the ﬁelds used for the astrometric calibration. Upper left panel: 47 Tuc; upper right panel: NGC 3603;
lower left panel: NGC 6380; lower right panel: Orion B1B4. A logarithmic intensity scale is used to show also faint stars.
of the pixel scale of 7.46±0.02 mas/pixel. Variations in this case
have less impact on the results due to the small ﬁeld of view.
The typical measurement accuracy of the pixel scale is ±0.012
mas/pixel using our two best ﬁelds 47 Tuc and NGC 3603, while
the true north correction (weighted value -1.77 degree) typically
has an error of ±0.07 degree. For IFS, an additional o ﬀset of
100.48 degree in the clockwise direction is applied to account for
the orientation of the instrument FOV . This leads to uncertainties
in the position of 3–4 mas at the edge of the IRDIS ﬁeld of view
and less than 1 mas for IFS. For comparison, typical accuracy
of GPI using their best calibrations are ±0.021 mas/pixel in the
pixel scale and ±0.12 degree in the true north correction (De
Rosa et al. 2019). The better calibration accuracy obtained for
SPHERE is due to the wider ﬁeld of view of IRDIS that allows
the use of stellar cluster ﬁelds as calibrators with more accurate
catalog positions.
Field/Pupil tracking and parallactic angle calibration While
the SHINE science observations are taken in pupil-tracking
mode for ADI purposes, the astrometric ﬁelds were observed in
ﬁeld-tracking mode. The o ﬀset between the pupil-tracking and
ﬁeld-tracking modes was measured at the beginning of the sur-
vey to be equal to -135.99 ±0.11 degree. The parallactic angle
is computed from the data FITS header: timestamp, RA/DEC of
the derotator (INS4.DROT2.RA/DEC) which are more accurate
than the "RA" and "DEC" keywords (J2000 coordinates of the
target). In case these parameters are used it is possible to cor-
rect for the precession of coordinates between 2000 and the date
of observation. In order to derive the precise parallactic angle
of each DIT from the timestamp we also included a paramet-
ric model of the overheads. We observe a systematic error in
the parallactic angle estimation due to backlash in the derotator
mechanism of∼0.05◦, as demonstrated in Beuzit et al. (2019).
In pupil-stabilized mode, this leads to a ∼0.4 pixel diﬀerence in
the position of an object located at the edge of the IRDIS FoV
on either side of the meridian.
Article number, page 7 of 30

<<<PAGE 8>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Star centering The astrometry we consider in this paper is rel-
ative to the star. Since the star point spread function peak is
hidden by the coronagraphic mask and to avoid concerns due
to the non uniform intensity distribution of the coronagraphic
leakage, its position was determined using a special calibration
(STAR-CENTER) where four faint replicas of the star image are
created by giving a bi-dimensional sinusoidal proﬁle to the de-
formable mirror (see Beuzit et al. 2019; Makidon et al. 2005).
The STAR-CENTER calibration was repeated before and after
each science observation, and results center estimations were av-
eraged. While this calibration greatly reduces uncertainties in the
exact position of the star and the center of the ﬁeld rotation, ex-
perience shows that small drifts of a few mas of the star center
during long sequences of∼1–2h can occur. For this reason in or-
der to increase the star centering accuracy, we generally used, for
the second epochs, when doing (candidate) companions follow
up, the STAR-CENTER setup solely for the science exposure.
We performed speciﬁc measurements to estimate the accu-
racy of the central star position when the STAR-CENTER setup
is not used for the science exposure (i.e most cases presented
in this paper). To do so we measured the position of the central
diﬀraction peak on the IFS datacubes collapsed in wavelengths,
and making the mean over all Detector Integration Time (DIT);
as mentioned above, errors are likely independent of the errors
in the STAR-CENTER procedure. We found that the mean posi-
tion of the center is o ﬀset with respect to the nominal position
along the Left-Right direction in the pupil reference frame by a
small but signiﬁcant amount 0.52± 0.10 mas for Y-H observa-
tions, while there is no oﬀset for the Y-J mode (0.03± 0.05 mas)
or along the Top-Bottom direction in the pupil reference frame in
both modes. The root mean square (rms) scatter of the residuals
after a 3-σ clipping are 1.35 mas (1.23 mas) in RA and 1.24 mas
(1.43 mas) in declination, for the Y-H (Y-J) mode. Most outliers
are found in data sets that were not validated and a few of them
are binaries. There are 5% of the validated observations that have
much larger dispersion of the position of the peak than usual;
these anomalous cases make∼10% of the observations acquired
before February 2016, while the fraction reduces to ∼2% after
that epoch. This is likely due to improvements in the AO cali-
bration, that resulted in less distorted di ﬀraction peaks. A few
of these residual cases may be unresolved binaries. We conclude
that a reasonable estimate for the accuracy of the absolute central
star position is±1.5 mas for both IFS and IRDIS.
Cross-check with Gaia DR2 An external check of the accu-
racy of our astrometry is provided by wide companions in the
Gaia Data Release 2 catalogue (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2018).
The number of sources in the IRDIS ﬁeld of view with a con-
trast adequate to be detected with Gaia is limited because stars
with known bright companions were not included in our sam-
ple to avoid problems for the AO and heavy saturation of the
detector. By comparison with the SPHERE results, we ﬁnd that
Gaia DR2 limiting contrast (in the visual G-band) corresponds
to contrasts in the near infrared of ∆H=2.5 mag for separation
sep< 2.5 arcsec and 6 mag for sep > 4 arcsec 2. For this com-
parison, we considered 34 IRDIS close companion candidates
(some of them not included in the sample described in this pa-
per) with ∆H2<6 mag; out of which twelve are in Gaia DR2.
We did not considered one of the Gaia DR2 data because it has
very large error bars. In addition we removed some SHINE ob-
jects because they are saturated, or located at the edge of the
2 Since the companions are typically much redder than the central star,
the contrast in the visual band is a few magnitudes deeper.
IRDIS FOV (sep>6.5 arcsec), both leading to inaccurate astrom-
etry. Gaia measurements are most likely unreliable for very high
contrasts. This is the case of HD1160C, for which the Gaia con-
trast is 8.24 mag. Binary periods for these stars are so long that
they should not a ﬀect the result. However, a couple of the ob-
jects are not binaries but rather background stars (HIP82430 and
PDS 70). We took into account the relative proper motion be-
tween the SHINE observation and the Gaia epoch (2015.5). At
the end we have seven good comparative measurements.The sep-
aration measured by SHINE is slightly larger than that measured
by Gaia DR2. The mean o ﬀset is−2.8± 1.5 mas, with a root
mean square (rms) of 3.9 mas. The position angle measured by
SHINE is similar to that measured by Gaia DR2: the mean o ﬀ-
set is 0.06± 0.04 degree, with an rms = 0.11 degree. The rms
agrees well with the expected uncertainties in these quantities in
the SPHERE data.
We conclude that the minimum accuracy of the astrometric
calibration of SHINE data is ±2 mas at separations < 1 arcsec,
and±3 mas at larger separations. These values are similar to
the scatter typically observed for GPI astrometric calibrators (De
Rosa et al. 2019). In practice, the astrometric accuracy on the
position of faint substellar companions detected in the SHINE
data is limited by the measurement uncertainties from the image
post-processing (Sect. 3.3) and by the companion magnitude.
3.1.2. Photometry
We describe below the strategy to derive the relative photom-
etry of the SHINE candidates considering the unsaturated and
coronographic observations of a scientiﬁc target, and two tests
done by using IFS to validate our strategy for both IRDIS and
IFS which have very similar photometric biases.
Strategy In the SHINE survey, photometry of candidate com-
panions and limiting magnitudes for non detections are relative
in contrast to the central star. Since the star is behind the coro-
nagraphic mask, simultaneous photometry is not possible. We
thus include a ﬂux calibration ( STAR-FLUX) for both IRDIS and
IFS that is acquired just before and after the science exposure
by oﬀsetting the Diﬀerential Tip-Tilt Stage (DTTS) by about 0.5
arcsec with respect the coronagraphic mask using the SPHERE
tip/tilt mirror (Beuzit et al. 2019). When performing this calibra-
tion, suitable neutral density ﬁlters are inserted to avoid detector
saturation. The transmissions of these neutral density ﬁlters were
carefully calibrated from 0.9 to 2.3 microns (see Beuzit et al.
2019 and ESO website 3) and are taken into account for the con-
trast estimation. This procedure works very well in stable condi-
tions, but it may be aﬀected by variations of the Strehl ratio from
evolving observing conditions. Higher photometric accuracy can
be achieved by using the wa ﬄe pattern continuously (for com-
panion candidates follow up) during the observing sequence to
monitor the Strehl variations.
Cross-check with catalogues and binary companions A ﬁrst
test of the photometric calibration accuracy is provided by com-
paring the peak counts of the di ﬀraction image of the ﬂux cal-
ibration (corrected for the integration time and for the neutral
density ﬁlter transmission) to the apparent magnitude of the stars
from the 2MASS catalogue (Skrutskie et al. 2006), corrected for
atmospheric extinction. This procedure neglects stellar variabil-
3 https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/paranal/
instruments/sphere/inst/filters.html
Article number, page 8 of 30

<<<PAGE 9>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 3: Spectra of the white dwarfs used as spectrophotometric standards compared with predictions from model atmospheres (solid
lines). Diﬀerent symbols are results obtained from di ﬀerent epochs. We normalized the observed spectra at the median ﬂux in a
narrow range around 1.25 micron.
ity and the impact of variability on the Strehl ratio. Using J-band
IFS data, we obtain an rms of residuals of 0.15 mag for observa-
tion in the Y-H mode, and 0.19 mag for those in the Y-J mode.
This has been computed after eliminating the expected variations
due the Strehl ratio and after clipping outliers deviating greater
than 2.5 standard deviation from the mean with an iterative pro-
cedure (about 12% of the data). A similar value is obtained by
considering the rms scatter of the estimate of the coronagraph
central transmission - measured as the ratio between the maxi-
mum counts of the di ﬀraction peak in the coronagraphic image
and in the ﬂux calibration (corrected for the length of the integra-
tion and neutral density ﬁlter transmission). The average corona-
graphic transmission measured in this way are 0.00168±0.00005
for the Y-H mode, and 0.00208± 0.00001 for the Y-J mode, re-
spectively, for a median SHINE observation.
A second test of the photometric calibration accuracy is pro-
vided by the photometry of three standard systems (HD2133,
HD114174, and REJ1925-563) composed of a main sequence
star and a white dwarf with separations in the range 0.2-0.7 arc-
sec, we have observed during the survey. These systems were ob-
served several times, with typically at least one observation per
run. For schedule optimization, these observations were acquired
in ADI with the star quite far from meridian and in poorer ob-
serving conditions, than typical survey targets: we consider here
only those observations that were obtained in fair to good atmo-
spheric conditions. Photometry of the faint companions was ob-
tained by inserting a negative scaled point spread function at the
position of the companion in the raw datacube, i.e before com-
bining the various DITs. We then measured the rms residuals
of the diﬀerential image obtained through monochromatic prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA: Soummer et al. 2012) around
the companion. The procedure then minimizes these residuals
by simultaneously adjusting the contrast and the position. The
values we consider are the mean of the results obtained using
2 to 6 PCA modes. The average contrasts in the J-band ob-
tained with this procedure using the main sequence star and
the white dwarfs are 7.68, 10.04, and 6.10 mag for HD2133,
HD114174, and REJ1925-563, respectively. The rms value for
the contrasts in the J-band/H-band are 0.11/0.05, 0.18/0.08, and
0.05/0.07 mag for HD2133 (8 observations), HD114174 (14 ob-
servations) and REJ1925-563 (6 observations). The photometric
errors as expected increase with magnitude and as a consequence
are smaller in H-band than in J-band. This may be also attributed
to a higher impact of the variation of the SR and of the speckle
noise for fainter targets and shorter wavelengths. A comparison
of the spectra determined by our method with atmospheric mod-
els is given in Figure 3.
We conclude from these measurements that a reasonable
photometric errors estimate for both the limiting contrast and
for companions characterisation (not including the ADI post
processing error contribution), is around ±0.2 mag. It is domi-
nated by the STAR-FLUX variation which is also the case for
the survey data photometric error which is on average equal to
±0.25 mag.
3.2. SPHERE Data Center preprocessing
3.2.1. IRDIS-only steps
The SHINE survey was reduced by the SPHERE Data Cen-
tre (hereafter SPHERE-DC) 4. For IRDIS data, the ﬁrst reduc-
tions steps (dark/background, ﬂat, and bad pixel correction) rely
on the SPHERE Data Reduction and Handling (hereafter DRH)
pipeline Pavlov et al. (2008) provided by ESO. We used the on
sky background because there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
day-time background calibrations and the on sky background
recorded in the science frames. This is the case mostly in K-
band with a systematic, spatially variable, oﬀset (typically of the
order of 100 ADU for 64s exposure time) which is due to the sky
background contribution itself. A similar eﬀect is also visible in
H-band, on a smaller level (typically of only few ADU).
Since most of the SHINE observations use the pupil-tracking
observing mode, a very accurate determination of the star center
is needed in order to successfully use both the angular di ﬀer-
ential imaging and spectral di ﬀerential imaging methods. Also
since IRDIS is used in dual-band imaging, the star center in both
IRDIS channels is used to combine them. By default, we use
the DRH sph-ird-star-center routine to determine the star
center position, using the wa ﬄe images acquired for this pur-
pose just before and after the science observations. This very
fast routine provides an accurate centering in many cases, but
could fail for weak waﬄe spots, especially in the K-band where
these spots can be hidden beneath a much stronger thermal back-
ground noise but also when the deformable mirror oﬀsets to cre-
ate this pattern are set too low. We therefore designed an auto-
mated way to check the quality of the DRH centering by com-
paring the two center positions derived out of the four wa ﬄes.
When the distance between these two possible center positions
was found to be greater than 0.9 pixel, we used a SPHERE-DC
made IDL routine that is more robust to identify weak wa ﬄe
4 http://sphere.osug.fr/spip.php?rubrique16&lang=en
Article number, page 9 of 30

<<<PAGE 10>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
spots. This routine is able to detect weaker wa ﬄes by locat-
ing them within small circular apertures located at the expected
(wavelength-dependent) position and by using in combination a
high-pass spatial ﬁltering, sky-background subtraction and me-
dian stacks of all wa ﬄe images available in order to increase
their SNR.
A small fraction of the SHINE datasets use continuous waﬄe
mode observations, meaning that the wa ﬄe spots are activated
during the entire observation, for better astrometric monitoring
(with some localized loss in the limiting contrast because of the
secondary spots). In this speciﬁc cases, we perform individual
re-centering of each frame in the sequence using the SPHERE-
DC dedicated star-centering routine described above. This im-
proves the quality by correcting any drift or jitter of the targeted
star behind the coronagraph, and as a result improves the quality
of the astrometric measurements by removing these sources of
error.
3.2.2. IFS-steps
For IFS data we use the Data Reduction and Handling (DRH
Pavlov et al. 2008) pipeline but complement it with additional
steps implemented at the SPHERE Data Center (Mesa et al.
2015; Delorme et al. 2017a) to improve the wavelength cali-
bration, apply a correction for cross-talk, and improve the han-
dling of bad pixels. The improvements of the wavelength cali-
bration are obtained by using a cubic ﬁt whose coe ﬃcients are
estimated from the wavelength shifts of the spots generated by
the STAR-CENTER calibration - that are known to scale linearly
with wavelength. The cross-talk correction is performed using
an iterative procedure that corrects for the spectrograph PSF, us-
ing coeﬃcients derived using appropriate tests performed in the
laboratory during the instrument assembly. Bad-pixels are cor-
rected using a dedicated sky observation acquired at the end of
each science exposure. This procedure yields more accurate re-
sults than the one based on the ﬂat ﬁeld calibration within the
DRH.
3.2.3. Final steps common to IRDIS and IFS
After these pre-reduction steps, both IRDIS and IFS datasets are
corrected for the instrument anamorphism and the astrometric
solution (pixel scale and True north) estimated from the calibra-
tion described in Sec. 3.1.1 is applied to the dataset. The out-
put data is composed of a pre-reduced master cube combining
all frames obtained during a given observation sequence, that is
used as input for all Angular Di ﬀerential Imaging (ADI Marois
et al. 2006) algorithms. We also associate to this master cube
a vector of de-rotation angles for each frames, using the accu-
rate timing and overheads for each frame, to produce a frame-to-
frame determination of the parallactic angle.
3.3. ADI and ASDI postprocessing
For both IRDIS and IFS, we obtain a good-quality re-centered
images gathered in a single master cube associated with their
parallactic angle values. Subsequent steps follow to estimate and
subtract the stellar halo from each images, followed by derota-
tion and stacking of the residuals. The most critical step is the es-
timation of the stellar halo that drives the level of the noise resid-
uals. We applied di ﬀerent Angular Di ﬀerential Imaging (ADI)
algorithms to optimize the detection performances and to iden-
tify associated biases. We rely mainly on the SpeCal (Galicher
et al. (2018) software which o ﬀers various ADI options. We
selected for the homogeneous reduction TLOCI (Marois et al.
2014; Galicher et al. 2018) and Principal Component Analysis
(PCA: Soummer et al. 2012) for IRDIS and PCA Angular and
Spectral Diﬀerential Imaging (ASDI: Mesa et al. 2015) for IFS.
In the TLOCI approach (Lafrenière et al. 2007), the PSF-
reference is estimated for each frame and each location. Linear
combinations of all data are computed to minimize the residuals
into an optimization zone, which is much bigger than the sub-
traction zone to avoid the self-removal of point-like sources.The
SpeCal version of the TLOCI algorithm is derived from the one
described in Galicher et al. (2018) assuming a ﬂat planet spec-
trum in contrast. Adjustable parameters are used to select the
frames and to describe the regions of interest. In SpeCal, the
gap between this region and the region of interest is set to 0.5
Full Width Half-Maximum (FWHM). Hence, the optimizing re-
gion is far enough from the region of interest so that the ﬂux of a
source in the latter does not signiﬁcantly bias the linear combina-
tion. Finally, an additional parameter sets the radial width of the
optimizing region. We considered here a radial width of the sub-
traction zone of 1 FWHM in radius; a radial-to-azimuthal width
ratio of 1.5; a standard surface of the optimization zone was N=
20 PSF FWHM and 10% is used for the minimum residual ﬂux
ratio due to self subtraction compared to the ﬂux of a putative
candidate.
For historical reasons, two PCA algorithms are implemented
in SpeCal. The ﬁrst version can be applied on IRDIS or IFS
data using ADI or ASDI. This algorithm follows the equation
of Soummer et al. (2012). In the ADI case, which is the option
selected to reduce IRDIS data in this paper, the principal com-
ponents are calculated for each spectral channel independently.
Each frame is then projected onto a limited number of modes. In
the ASDI case, the algorithm is the same but it works simulta-
neously on the spatial and spectral frames. The second version
of PCA used to reduce IFS data in this paper, is very similar to
the ﬁrst version we have described but it was applied only on
IFS data using the ASDI option (Mesa et al. 2015). In addition,
it is worth mentioning that both PCA algorithms we use have
no frame selection to minimize the self-subtraction of point-like
sources when deriving the principal components.
For PCA and TLOCI algorithms that bias the photometry of
oﬀ -axis point sources, SpeCal estimates the throughput at each
position in the ﬁeld by generating a datacube of fake planets for
which the ratio of the ﬂux in the resulting image to the ﬂux of the
fake planet is calculated to obtain the centro-symmetrical 1D-
throughput as a function of the angular separation which is then
applied to the images. For PCA, Specal estimates the through-
put by inserting fake planets injections which are only 10 times
brighter than the local stellar residuals level after PCA. This
makes it possible to be close to the level of interest while be-
ing suﬃciently above the residual to minimize the bias in the
throughput estimation. For TLOCI, the throughput is calculated
from an analytical formula (see section 2.10.2 of Galicher et al.
(2018). The contrast curves, we derived in the following, for
each spectral channel are based on the azimuthal standard de-
viation calculated in annuli of 0.5 FWHM width. Finally, the
5σ detection limits are derived by taking into account the ﬂux
loss from ADI self-subtractions, the transmission of the coro-
nagraph at short separations (close to the inner working angle
(IW A: 0.1”) and the transmission of the neutral-density ﬁlter if
used when registering the PSF. These detection limits are thus
normalized by the unsaturated PSF ﬂux. Both 1D and 2D con-
trast maps are estimated following these steps for each star for
each reduction technique.
Article number, page 10 of 30

<<<PAGE 11>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
All target stars were processed for each instrument in a ho-
mogeneous way using at least TLOCI or PCA with similar sets
of parameters. We considered 50, 100 and 150 PCA modes for
IFS and 5 for IRDIS. We inspected by eye at least three residual
maps for each star and for both IFS and IRDIS to look for candi-
date companions (CC). We also included small number statistic
correction. In addition to the standard SpeCal reductions, we also
used, on several cases, ANDROMEDA (Cantalloube et al. 2015)
and PACO (Flasseur et al. 2018, 2020b) algorithms to search for
points sources. Given their statistical robustness to derive detec-
tion limits and to better identify false detections these algorithms
will become the main algorithms for the ﬁnal analysis of the
SHINE survey.
3.4. Astrometric and Photometric extraction for point sources
PCA and TLOCI algorithms are known to distort the images of
any oﬀ-axis point-like source. To retrieve accurately the relative
photometry and astrometry of the detected candidate compan-
ions (CC) with their uncertainties, SpeCal ﬁts a model of an oﬀ-
axis point source image to the detected point source and adjusts
its position and ﬂux to locally minimize the ﬂux. After build-
ing a model of the point source using the technique described in
(Galicher & Marois 2011), the ﬂux and the position of this syn-
thetic image are adjusted within a disk of diameter 3 FWHM so
that it includes the positive and the negative parts of the point
source image. To optimize the computation time, instead of cal-
culating the synthetic image each time we test a new planet po-
sition, we shift the synthetic planet image to its rough position.
Once the optimization is completed, we measure the excursion
of each parameters that increases the minimum residual level by
a factor of 1.15. These excursions correspond to the 1σ accuracy
due to the ﬁtting errors in the SpeCal outputs. The spectrum ex-
traction from IFS data is performed similarly by processing the
wavelength channels separately. For the channels with no detec-
tion above 1σ we provide an estimation of the upper limit only.
In conclusion, we summarize the astrometric and photomet-
ric error budget given by Specal considering both calibrations
and ADI/ASDI extraction errors.
For astometry, this budget includes:
1. calibration with uncertainties of the detector distorsion, plate
scale and True North,
2. determination of the correction for constant o ﬀset angles
(between the IFS and IRDIS ﬁelds of view, between pupil-
tracking and ﬁeld-tracking modes);
3. calculation of the parallactic angle variation (correction of
precession and timestamp),
4. central star position,
5. determination of the companion /candidate relative position
with Specal (Galicher et al. 2018).
For photometry, it includes:
1. Contrast estimation with proper calibration of neutral den-
sity, exposure time, and associated error related to the vari-
ation between Start /End STAR-FLUX calibrations but not
including the strehl variation during the observing sequence
(psf),
2. Temporal variations of the stellar coronographic ﬂux be-
tween 30-50 pixels during the observing sequence (Seq),
3. Companion ﬂux determination considering ASDI signature,
taking into account ﬂux cancellation from the algorithm
used, and coronograph attenuation correction as described
in (Galicher et al. 2018). .
4. High contrast Performances
4.1. Contrast curves
We derived the 5-σ IRDIS and IFS contrast curves of each ob-
servation for all the targets in the sample as presented on Figures
4 and 5. These detection limits are derived based on the noise
in the speckle-subtracted image, compensated for the through-
put of the algorithm (calibrated with fake planet injections), the
transmission of the coronagraph (calibrated from measurements
in SPHERE), and the small sample statistics (Mawet et al. 2014).
More details are provided in Galicher et al. (2018). Two types of
contrast are discussed in detail in this section: the raw contrast,
computed on the median coronagraphic image of each observa-
tion and the contrast after post-processing described above. As
illustrated on Fig B.1 and B.4, the raw coronagraphic contrast at
various separations shows a strong dependency with the Strehl
and seeing both estimated by the average of the SPARTA values
during the coronagraphic sequence. The two smaller separations
(from 100 to 700 mas) are within the AO control radius located
at 840 mas separation radius in the H-band.
This dependency remains clearly visible on post-processed
data especially at 500 mas, despite other factors also coming into
considerations such as the ﬁeld rotation and the stability of the
conditions (see Fig B.2). At small separation, these scatter plots
shows that one can easily gain one magnitude in raw contrast
by increasing the Strehl by 10% or the decreasing the seeing by
30%. As a consequence it is clear that conducting the survey in
visitor mode which does not o ﬀer the best seeing condition had
some impact on the survey ultimate contrast performances. Out-
side the AO correction radius, at separation greater than 900 mas,
there is still a smaller dependency of the contrast with the seeing
due to the residual light scattering outside the AO control ra-
dius and the lower height of the diﬀraction peak. As part of this
study, the dependency of the post-ADI contrast on parameters
tracing the quality and stability of the conditions were also in-
vestigated as illustrated on Fig B.1, B.4 and B.2. We considered
the dispersion in the seeing, coherence time, Strehl, during the
duration of the pupil-stabilised sequence. No signiﬁcant correla-
tion could be drawn from this sample. It is worth noticing that at
small separation (100 mas) the processed contrast is lower than
the raw contrast because of the very small angular rotation, the
small throughput of the algorithm (from self subtraction) and the
stronger coronagraphic residuals.
The gain from raw contrast to post-processed contrast is
clearly visible on Fig 6 which shows a typical improvement
greater than 5 magnitudes at short separations for both IRDIS
and IFS. It is worth noticing that the contrast gain in the IFS
ﬁeld of view is consistent for all separations and reach at least 7
magnitude. For the shorter separation located at the edge of the
coronagraph (100 mas) there is marginal improvement for IFS
from ASDI and no improvement for IRDIS in contrast due to
the very small angular rotation, the small throughput of the algo-
rithm and the stronger coronagraphic residuals for both instru-
ments. At larger separation than the AO cutoﬀ, the improvement
from the post-processing range from 2 to 4 magnitudes.
We also plot on Fig B.3 the processed contrast as function
of the star magnitude for both IFS and IRDIS at various separa-
tions. From these ﬁgures it is clear that there seem to be small
correlation between these parameters when the post-processing
if performed using TLOCI. On the contrary the PCA method for
both IRDIS and IFS seems to be a ﬀected by the magnitude of
the star at least for the largest separations which is likely related
to the noise from the instruments background.
Article number, page 11 of 30

<<<PAGE 12>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Fig. 4: Contrast curves at 5σ obtained for the full sample for irdifs-ext (Left) and irdifs (right) modes observations. The solid line
gives the median value of the contrast. The dash line gives the mean value of the contrast. Red color is for IRDIS data reduced in
PCA ADI, Blue color is for IRDIS data reduced in TLOCI ADI, and green color is for IFS with PCA ASDI reduction
We also highlight that one clear cause of contrast degradation
in the post-ADI contrast is the presence of a smooth halo within
the AO-corrected region which results from either bad seeing or
from high-altitude wind related to the jet stream as discussed in
(Cantalloube et al. 2018) leading to a non symmetrical halo in
the direction of the wind (called the wind driven halo, WDH).
This halo is rotating in the pupil-stabilised data set because it is
ﬁxed on the sky as described in (Cantalloube et al. 2020). In post-
ADI frames, it therefore appears as a brighter elongation along
the wind direction, with negative counterparts at 90 degrees. The
impact of this e ﬀect does not appear to be very strong on the
azimuthal averaged contrasts we have plotted but is noticeable
on the 2D contrast maps. Increasing the temporal bandwidth of
SAXO is the foreseen solution to help mitigate this e ﬀect. This
is considered as one option in a forthcoming upgrade of the in-
strument, SPHERE+ (Boccaletti et al. 2020).
4.2. Mass detection limits
The contrast curves are converted into mass limits using mass-
luminosity relationships. Whereas for old (& 1 Gyr) systems this
relationship is essentially unique for gas giants at large sepa-
ration (Burrows et al. 1997; Bara ﬀe et al. 2003), at young ages
the value of the post-formation luminosity still remains uncertain
(Marley et al. 2007; Spiegel & Burrows 2012; Marleau & Cum-
ming 2014). We present here a mass conversion of the contrast
curves for a few speciﬁc targets using the canonical predictions
of the COND-2003 evolutionary models (Bara ﬀe et al. 2003).
The impact of using other mass-luminosity relationships on the
sensitivity of the SHINE survey are explored in more details in
Vigan et al. (2020). For IRDIS contrast curves, we convert the
contrast curves using the evolutionary models computed in the
appropriate dual-band ﬁlter, while for the IFS contrast curves we
use the predictions in the J-band ﬁlter for YJ data and in the H-
band ﬁlter for YJH data. As demonstrated in Vigan et al. (2015),
this approach for the IFS detection limits provides an accurate
estimation of the detection limit.
For a selection of companions presented in 5.1, we show
the detection of planet-like limits achieved by the survey in Fig.
10. Several targets appear to be relatively easy (HR 8799 bcd,
HIP 65426 and HIP 64892) for this survey, allowing for exquisite
characterisation. Other targets appear to be much more challeng-
ing mainly because they are at separations closer than 20 AU.
The detection limits for these typical objects reach few Jupiter
masses at such small separation while it can reach around 1
Jupiter mass at separations greater than 50 AU.
5. Exoplanet, Candidate Companion Detections
5.1. Brown dwarfs and exoplanets
A total of sixteen substellar companions were imaged in
the course of this part of the SHINE survey, including
seven brown dwarf companions (PZ Tel B, η Tel B, CD -
35 2722 B, HIP 78530 B, HIP 107412 B, GSC 8047-0232 B and
HIP 64892 B), and ten planetary-mass companions (51 Eri b, β
Pictoris b, HD 95086 b, HR8799 bcde, GJ 504 b, AB Pic b and
HIP 65426 b). Two new companions have been discovered in
this sample: the exoplanet HIP 65426 b (Chauvin et al. 2017b)
and the brown dwarf companion to HIP 64892 B (Cheetham
et al. 2018). PDS 70 was not originally part of the SHINE sam-
Article number, page 12 of 30

<<<PAGE 13>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 5: Contrast curves at 5 σ obtained for a small subsample of targets dedicated to follow up for IRDIS mode observations. The
solid line gives the median value of the contrast. The dash line gives the mean value of the contrast. Red color is for IRDIS data
reduced in PCA ADI, Blue color is for IRDIS data reduced in TLOCI ADI
Fig. 6: IRDIS and IFS processed contrast computed using respectively TLOCI and PCA-ASDI as function of raw contrast at various
separations in irdifs mode. Blue is for 100 mas separation, orange for 200 mas separation and pink for 400 mas separations, black
for 500 mas separation, , brown for 700 mas separation, red for 1000 mas separation , green for 2000 mas separation and yellow for
4000 mas separations. The black and brown line represent respectively a gain of 1 and 6.25 assuming 39 spectral channels. In fact
So there are 15 independent spectral IFS channels leading to a maximum gain of 3.9 when neglecting the possible combination of
the two IRDIS channels.
ple and was speciﬁcally targeted to explore the properties of
the transition disk that led to the discovery of the ﬁrst planet
PDS 70 b in this system (Keppler et al. 2018; Müller et al. 2018),
and the conﬁrmation of the second planet PDS 70 c (Mesa et al.
2019). The other substellar companions, known from previous
direct imaging campaigns, were originally blindly selected based
on their host star properties, but then carefully characterized to
study their orbital, spectral and physical properties in connec-
tion sometimes with their environment (the presence of addi-
tional planets or disk structures in the system). The SNR maps
for a selection of candidates are shown in Fig. 7 for IFS data
and Fig. 8 for IRDIS data. The extracted spectro-photometric
data are reported in Fig. 11. The measured position, contrast,
semi-major axis, predicted mass for each companion are listed
in Table 1. The detection limits for a few of these systems are
shown on Fig. 10 as illustration of the SPHERE performances.
The Sco-Cen members HIP 71724 and HIP 73990 with stellar
to substellar-mass companion previously discovered in sparse-
aperture masking by Hinkley et al. (2015) were observed, but the
close companions were not resolved given their probable small
separations at the epoch of our observations.
In addition to the discovery and characterization papers
on HIP 65426 b and HIP 64892 B summarized below, in-depths
studies of various of these companions based on from the SHINE
sample have been published in these early years of the sur-
vey: PZ Tel B (Maire et al. 2016a), HIP 107412 B (Milli et al.
2017a; Delorme et al. 2017b) for the brown dwarf companion,
and HR 8799 b,c,d,e (Zurlo et al. 2016; Bonnefoy et al. 2016),
51 Eri b (Samland et al. 2017; Maire et al. 2019), HD 95086 b
Article number, page 13 of 30

<<<PAGE 14>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Fig. 7: SNR maps for the sample data where at least a substellar close companion was detected with IFS. In each panel, the green
cross mark the star position
(Chauvin et al. 2018), β Pictoris b (Lagrange et al. 2019),
GJ 504 b(Bonnefoy et al. 2018) for the imaged exoplanets.
5.1.1. HIP 65426 b
HIP 65426 b was the ﬁrst planet discovered with SPHERE
as part of the SHINE Survey (Chauvin et al. (2017b)). This
warm, dusty giant planet is orbiting at a relatively large pro-
jected angular distance of of 830 mas (92 au projected) from
its intermediate-mass primary (Fig. 7 and 8). Multi-epoch ob-
servations conﬁrm that it shares common proper motion with
HIP 65426, a young A2 member of the 17 Myr old Lower
Centaurus-Crux association. Spectro-photometric measurements
extracted with IFS and IRDIS, as shown in Fig. 11, between 0.95
and 2.2 µm indicate a warm, dusty atmosphere characteristics
of young low-surface gravity L5-L7 dwarfs. Hot-start evolution-
ary models predict a luminosity consistent with a 6 − 12 MJup,
Teﬀ = 1300− 1600 K and R =1.5 RJup for the planet. These re-
sults were later conﬁrmed by Cheetham et al. (2019) combining
SPHERE and NaCo observations.
Given its physical and spectral properties, HIP 65426 b rep-
resents a particularly interesting case to study the presence of
clouds as a function of particle size, composition, and location
in the atmosphere, to search for signatures of non-equilibrium
chemistry, and ﬁnally to test models of planet formation and evo-
lution (Cheetham et al. 2018). The planet location would not fa-
vor a formation by core accretion unless HIP 65426 b formed
signiﬁcantly closer to the star followed by a planet-planet scat-
tering event. Dedicated simulations by Marleau et al. (2019)
showed that core formation at small separations from the star fol-
lowed by outward scattering and runaway accretion at a few hun-
dred astronomical units succeeds in reproducing the mass and
separation of HIP 65426 b. In such a scenario, the planet is pre-
dicted to have a high eccentricity (≥ 0.5) and to be accompanied
by one or several roughly Jovian-mass planets at smaller semi-
major axes, which also could have a high eccentricity. SHINE
detection limits setting relatively good constraints at close sepa-
ration (2 MJup beyond 20 au) as shown in Fig. 10 do not exclude
the presence of unseen inner massive planets in that system that
could have scattered out HIP 65426 b.
5.1.2. HIP 64892 B
A bright, brown dwarf companion was also discovered around
the star HIP 64892, a B9.5V member of the Lower Centaurus-
Crux association. The measured angular separation of the com-
panion (about 1.27") corresponds to a projected distance of
159 au. We observed this target with IRDIS dual-band Imaging
and in long-slit spectroscopy to estimate its spectral energy dis-
tribution and astrometry. More details can be found in the discov-
ery paper by Cheetham et al. (2018). Luminosity and spectrum
are consistent with a young (16 Myr), low-surface gravity brown
Article number, page 14 of 30

<<<PAGE 15>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 8: SNR maps for the sample data where at least a substellar close companion were detected with IRDIS. In each panel, the
white cross marks the star position
-3 -2 -1 0
J3-J2
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
MJ3
M0-M5
M6-M9
L0-L5
L6-L9
T0-T5
T6-T9.5
GSC0621-0021B
Hip 64892B
GJ 504b
HIP 43620B
GU Psc B
GJ 758b
1RXS1609b
CD-352722B
HN Peg B
UScoCTIO 108B
ζ  Del B
2M1207b
VHS 1256ABb
young/dusty dwarfs
WISE1647+56
Y0-Y2
Interstellar (R=3.1)
0.5 µ m forsterite
-3 -2 -1 0
J3-J2
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
MJ3
-4 -2 0 2
H2-H3
20
15
10MH2
M0-M5
M6-M9
L0-L5
L6-L9
T0-T5
T6-T9.5
young/dusty dwarfs
WISE1647+56
HR8799b
HR8799c
HR8799d
HR8799e
1RXS1609b
2M1207b
GU Psc B
HN Peg B
β  Pic b
UScoCTIO 108B
HIP 64892B
HIP 78530B
GSC0621-0021B
PDS70 b
VHS 1256ABb
ζ  Del B
HIP 43620B
51 Eri b
HD 106906 b
GJ 758b
GJ 504b
Hip 65426b
Contaminant
Companion
Ambiguous
Y0-Y2
-4 -2 0 2
H2-H3
20
15
10MH2
Interstellar (R=3.1)
0.5 µ m forsterite
-3 -2 -1 0 1
K1-K2
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
MK1
M0-M5
M6-M9
L0-L5
L6-L9
T0-T5
T6-T9.5
young/dusty dwarfs
WISE1647+56
WISE0754+79
1RXS1609b
HD 206893B2M1207b
HN Peg B
UScoCTIO 108B
HD 106906 b
PDS70 b
PDS70 c
ζ  Del B
GSC0621-0021B
HIP 78530B
Hip 64892B
GJ 504b
Hip 65426b
VHS 1256ABb
HR8799b
HR8799c
HR8799d
HR8799e
Interstellar (R=3.1)
0.5 µ m forsterite
>T8
-3 -2 -1 0 1
K1-K2
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
MK1
Fig. 9: Photometry of the candidates (spots) observed in the sample of 159 stars and reported in color-magnitude diagrams assuming
a common distance with the host-star. The grey zone represents the excluded background-like point sources.
dwarf with a spectral type of M9. From comparison with the BT-
Settl atmospheric models its eﬀective temperature was estimated
to Teﬀ = 2600 K, and comparison of the companion photome-
try to the COND evolutionary models yields a mass between 29
and 37 MJup. Despite this, HIP 64892 is one of the highest mass
stars around which a substellar companion has been detected,
due to the challenges associated with observing such stars and
the tendency for large surveys to focus on solar-like or low-mass
stars. HIP 64892 is a rare example of high or intermediate mass
stars with extreme mass ratio ( q = 0.01) companions at large
separations and will be useful for testing models relating to the
formation and evolution of such low-mass objects.
Article number, page 15 of 30

<<<PAGE 16>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Table 1: Exoplanets and brown dwarf companions observed during the SHINE campaign
Name SpT host M⋆ a Mass Observation Contrast separation P.A. Ref.
(M⊙) (au) ( MJup) dates a (H2) (mas) (deg)
SHINE discoveries
HIP 64892 B B9 2.09 147–171 29–37 2016-04-01 7 .24± 0.08 1270 .5± 2.3 311 .68± 0.15 (1)
HIP 65426 b A2 1.96 80–210 7–9 2016-05-30 10 .73± 0.09 830 .4± 4.9 150 .28± 0.22 (2)
Previously known companions
η Tel B A0 2.00 125–432 20–50 2015-05-05 6 .99± 0.22 4214 .5± 22 167 .25± 0.08 (8)
CD -35 2722 B M1 0.56 74–216 23–39 2015-29-11 5 .89± 0.18 2987 .5± 3.51 241 .9± 0.06 (9)
HIP 78530 B B9 1.99 ∼620 19–26 2015-05-04 8 .05± XX 4537.5± 3.0 139 .98± 0.04 (18)
β Pic b A3 1.61 8.5–9.2 9–16 2018-12-15 9 .86± 0.1 177 .4± 4.51 29 .07± 0.6 (3,10)
HR 8799 b A5 1.42 62–72 5.3–6.3 2014-07-13 13 .19± 0.16 1721 .8± 6.0 65 .76± 0.19 (4,11)
HR 8799 c A5 1.42 39–45 6.5–7.8 2014-07-13 11 .99± 0.16 947 .7± 4.0 326 .58± 0.24 (4,11)
HR 8799 d A5 1.42 24–27 6.5–7.8 2014-07-13 12 .00± 0.17 658 .0± 5.0 216 .35± 0.52 (4,11)
HR 8799 e A5 1.42 14–17 6.5–7.8 2014-07-13 11 .93± 0.17 386 .1± 9.0 268 .81±1.3 (4,19)
HD 95086 b A8 1.55 28–64 2–9 2015-03-02 12 .37± 0.16 622 .0± 4.0 148 .8± 0.4 (5,12)
51 Eri b F0 1.45 10–16 6–14 2016-12-12 13 .96± 0.51 444 .8± 10.6 159 .4± 2.6 (6,20,13)
HIP 107412 B F5 1.32 6.2–7.1 15–30 2016-09-16 9 .67± 0.09 265 .0± 2.0 62 .25± 0.11 (22,14)
PZ Tel B G9 1.07 19–30 38–54 2014-07-15 5 .07± 0.61 478 .48± 2.10 59 .58± 0.48 (7,15,21)
AB Pic b K1 0.97 ∼250 13–30 2015-02-06 8 .04± 0.98 5392 .1± 13.1 175 .26± 0.15 (16)
GSC 8047-0232 B K2 0.89 190–880 15–35 2015-09-25 7 .67± 0.15 3207 .7± 2.7 358 .82± 1.03 (17)
GJ 504 b G0 1.15 40-50 4-6 2015-05-06 14 .56± 0.15 1463 .7± 3.8 323 .1± 0.1 (23, 24)
Notes. (a) We only list one selected epoch for each target
References. SHINE papers: (1) Cheetham et al. (2018); (2) Chauvin et al. (2017b); (3) Lagrange et al. (2019); (4) Zurlo et al. (2016); (5) Chauvin
et al. (2018); (6) Samland et al. (2017); (7) Maire et al. (2016a); (20) Maire et al. (2019); (24) Bonnefoy et al. (2018), Discovery papers: (8)
Lowrance et al. (2000); (9) Wahhaj et al. (2011); (10) Lagrange et al. (2009); (11) Marois et al. (2008); (12) Rameau et al. (2013a); (13) Macintosh
et al. (2015); (14) Milli et al. (2017a); (15) Biller et al. (2010); (16) Chauvin et al. (2005b); (17) Chauvin et al. (2005a); (18) Lafrenière et al.
(2011); (19) Marois et al. (2010); (21) Mugrauer et al. (2010); (22) Delorme et al. (2017b); (23) Kuzuhara et al. (2013b)
5.2. Colours and spectra of detected substellar companions
Fig. 11 shows the spectra of the brown dwarf and exoplanet com-
panions detected within the IFS ﬁeld of view: 51 Eri b, β Pic b,
HD 95086 b, HIP 65426 b, HR 8799 d and e, HIP 107412 B and
PZ Tel B. Most of these spectra are very red and can be classiﬁed
as of L- or early T-type. The only middle T-type object detected
in the IFS ﬁeld of view is 51 Eri b (Samland et al. 2017), while
PZ Tel B is an M-type object (Maire et al. 2016a). These very
red colors were quite unexpected for such faint objects, and indi-
cate that young substellar objects have a spectrum quite diﬀerent
from those of older ones of the same luminosity, which can be
interpreted as an indication for the presence of dust in their at-
mosphere (Chauvin et al. 2004; Bonnefoy et al. 2014). From the
point of view of planet detection - the focus of this paper - the
implication is that young substellar companions may be below
detection limit in the Y and J-band and even faint in the H-band,
while they may be detected quite easily in the K-band (extension
of the datacubes to short wavelengths is however useful to model
and better subtract speckles). An extreme case of this behaviour
is represented by HD 95086 b (Chauvin et al. 2018). This has
a signiﬁcant impact on the detection limits of our survey and
points toward the need of model atmospheres that include dust
to properly derive masses from the observed magnitudes.
5.3. Ranking and identiﬁcation of SHINE candidates
We identiﬁed 1483 unique candidates in the IRDIS images (all
epochs), 1176 of which were re-detected at several epochs or us-
ing archival data and 307 of which were only detected at a single
epoch. Most of the candidates have been observed with the H23
ﬁlters (> 95%). Sixty-nine candidates have K1-K2 photometry
extracted from the IRDIFS_EXT observations. They were identi-
ﬁed in follow-up observations of known systems (HD 95086,
HIP107412, HIP 65426, HIP 64892, CD-35 2722) or for the
most part in ﬁrst epoch observations of stars belonging to the
Sco-Cen association for which the detection of late-L dusty com-
panions with red near-infrared colors is favored at K-band (e.g.,
HD95086b; Chauvin et al. 2018).
We used color-magnitude diagrams (CMDs) to identify the
most promising candidates and perform an e ﬃcient follow-up
campaign. The candidate absolute magnitudes were computed
assuming they are bound and at the same distance as the ob-
served star. Most contaminants are expected to be M- and K-type
stars (e.g., Parravano et al. 2011). Their characteristic colors as
well as the range of contrasts probed by the observations cre-
ates a locus which can fall in a distinctive color-luminosity space
from the sequence of substellar objects in the CMDs. The dia-
grams are described in details in Bonnefoy et al. (2018) and are
enriched with the recent photometry and distances of reference
objects measured by Müller et al. (2018), Mesa et al. (2019), and
Dupuy et al. (2020).
The large number of candidates identiﬁed in the H23 obser-
vations allows for building a well deﬁned locus of contaminants
in the corresponding CMD (see Figure 9). The locus shows an
elongation along a vector which may be related to the distribu-
tion of spectral type of the contaminants combined to interstellar
extinction (the fainter the object with respect to the host star,
the higher the optical extinction and color reddening). The locus
intersects the sequence of substellar objects at the L /T transi-
tion and therefore can not discriminate contaminants from bound
companions falling in that luminosity range. We could however
deﬁne an exclusion zone (grey shaded region) where substellar
companions are not expected to produce such colors and abso-
Article number, page 16 of 30

<<<PAGE 17>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
lute magnitudes. The zone is deﬁned to avoid missing i / young
mid- and late- T-type planets such as 51 Eri b (Macintosh et al.
2015) which can have reddened colors with respect to mature
ﬁeld T-dwarfs and ii / young planets at the L /T transition such
as HR8799 which can appear under-luminous with respect to
older objects in the same temperature range. This criterion was
used to identify 44% of the candidates with H23 photometry
as likely contaminants for which a re-observation was not war-
ranted. Consequently, we decided to prioritize the observations
of candidates falling right on the sequence of late-M to mid-L
dwarfs and for which the locus spans a narrow range of bluer
colors in the same luminosity range. This allowed for identify-
ing HIP 64892B and HIP 65426b as promising candidates before
they could be conﬁrmed as co-moving objects. We could also
identify blindly known companions (e.g., HIP 78530B, η Tel B,
PZ Tel B, AB Pic b, CD-35 2722B, HIP 73990B) as promising
candidates.
Most of the remaining ambiguous candidates were observed
at a second epoch to determine whether they are co-moving com-
panions. Two crowded ﬁelds were observed with the J23 ﬁlter
set. As shown in Bonnefoy et al. (2018), the locus of contam-
inants falls at a distinct location from the substellar objects in
these CMDs and allowed to classify most of these candidates
as contaminants. The locus in the K1K2 diagrams is more dis-
persed and the error bars on the photometry tend to be wider
owing to the higher thermal background at these wavelengths.
Therefore, detections in K1K2 requires follow-up observations
to clarify the nature of the detections.
The ﬁnal status of the candidates is given in Table A.1.
The companions with a conﬁrmed common-proper motion are
ﬂagged as ’C’. The contaminants either discriminated using
the CMD or the comon-proper motion test are ﬂagged as
’B’.Ambiguous cases are ﬂagged as ’A’. We report in addition
several not clear detections (’NC’) in that table which corre-
spond to the identiﬁcation of candidates with unreliable astrom-
etry and/or photometry and for which our standard classiﬁcation
scheme could not be applied.
6. Disks detected in SHINE
While not speciﬁcally optimized for this purpose, our obser-
vations allowed detection of circumstellar disks, thanks to the
exquisite sensitivity and large FoV of IRDIS, twelve of SHINE
targets, out of which three were new detections. By construction
of our survey, they are debris disk - in fact, we did not consider
stars with gas-rich disks to reduce the concern related to the im-
pact of disks in planet detection. Table 2 collects the main data
for the disks we detected; a gallery of their appearance from the
IFS data is presented in Figure 12. Detailed analysis of each one
of these disks is subject of speciﬁc studies, most of them already
published (see Table 2).
Not surprisingly, stars with detected debris disks are typ-
ically young; the median age is 24 Myr (data from Paper I)
and there is only one target with an age older than 50 Myr
(HIP682=HD377). This result is similar to that obtained by the
survey by (Esposito et al. 2020). We notice that most of the de-
tected disks are seen at high inclinationi, with a median value of
i = 82 degree. The only disk that has a low inclination in our sur-
vey (TW A 7) was detected only in polarimetry (Olofsson et al.
2018). The strong dependence on inclination is because of the
combination of a deeper optical depth (debris disks being opti-
cally thin), of higher eﬃciency of forward scattering, and of the
use of angular diﬀerential imaging to reach deeper contrast (see
Milli et al. 2012; Sissa et al. 2018). This selection eﬀect would be
less severe using polarimetric observations, as often done when
studying disks (see the case of TW A 7; see also Esposito et al.
2020). The strong selection bias towards edge-on disks implies
that debris disks at the typical age of our targets should be much
more common than indicated by eleven detections over a sample
of 150 stars. If we indeed consider only the 52 stars with age
<30 Myr in our sample, we detected disk around 8 of them. In
ﬁve cases the inclination is i > 80 degrees, an occurrence that
has 17% of the probability to happen. This suggests that debris
disks similar to the ones we detected surround a large fraction of
young stars (see Sissa et al. 2018 for a similar argument about
the M-stars in our survey or Meshkat et al. 2017).
Debris disks have a limited impact on detection limits of
point sources. Low inclination debris disks have negligible ef-
fects because they are optically thin and well below detection
limit. For what concerns high inclination disks, the eﬀect is more
relevant (see Milli et al. 2012 for a discussion). They typically
cover a small fraction of the sky area; however, planet orbit is
possibly coplanar with the disk, so that the sky region covered
by the disk is where most likely the planets are. As discussed by
Milli et al. (2012), the ﬂux loss depends on the technique used,
and may be large for some of them. On the other hand, in addi-
tion to ﬂux losses, Milli et al. (2012) showed that disk features
may lead to false positive point sources detections. Furthermore,
the multi-wavelength approach allowed by simultaneously us-
ing both IFS and IRDIS provides more diagnostics for an appro-
priate classiﬁcation of detected features and more particullarly
point sources. The good sensitivity of ASDI-PCA to structures
within disks is clearly shown by the case of AU Mic, where this
technique allows to detect very faint point-like sources with con-
trasts of∼ 14.5 mag at SNR> 10 along the edge-on disk (Boc-
caletti et al. 2018). The SNR of these detections agree with the
expectation based on our estimate of the contrast limit at this
separation based on the whole images. Note that these structures
are however not planets: the spectrum is ﬂat, inconsistent with
that of young planets, and the objects are by far too bright to
be reﬂecting planets. We carefully considered a similar possibil-
ity for all our targets, and we are conﬁdent that there is no false
positive among our detections.
Concerning the detection of the disk structure themselves,
the standard ADI methods used in this paper lead to several
known causes of artifacts altering both the morphology and the
photometry of the disks. In particular they su ﬀer from positive
/ negative replicas and from the self-subtraction phenomenon
which can only be alleviated by using a physical model of in-
strumental eﬀects as recently proposed by (Pairet et al. 2020;
Flasseur et al. submitted) but which are beyond the scope of this
paper.
7. Conclusions and prospects
We process in a uniform manner more than 300 datasets from
the SPHERE/SHINE Survey obtained at the VLT/ESO in visitor
mode and assess SHINE survey typical sensitivity as a function
of the host star and observing conditions. From these ﬁrst 150
stars observed out of the planned 400-star survey, we reach typi-
cal contrasts of 106 at 1” separation and reach up to 107 contrast
at 2” separation for the best observations. SPHERE /SHINE de-
livers one of the few largest and deepest direct imaging surveys
for exoplanets conducted to date. Compared to GPIES, SHINE
has been operating in priority visitor mode, the observing con-
ditions for SHINE in regular visitor mode are highly variable
and on average not as good leading to a wider spreading of the
contrast performances.
Article number, page 17 of 30

<<<PAGE 18>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Table 2: Debris disk detected from the SHINE survey (F150 sample)
Star SpT MG Age i References
mag Myr Degree
New SHINE detections
HIP 73145 A2IV 7.87 17 72.6 Feldt et al. (2017)
HIP 86598 / HD 160305 F8 /G0V 8.18 24 82.0 Perrot, Clément et al. (2019)
HIP 59960 / HD 106906 F5V 7.68 13 5 Lagrange et al. (2016)
Previously known disks
β Pic b A6V 3.72 24 >89 Lagrange et al. (2019)
AU Mic M1V 7.84 24 >89 Boccaletti et al. (2018)
HIP 682/ HD 377 G2V 7.44 150 Langlois et al. in prep
HIP 11360 / HD 15115 F4IV 6.68 45 85.8 Engler et al. (2019)
HIP 36948 / HD 61005 G8V 8.00 50 84.5 Olofsson et al. (2016)
TW A 7 M2V 10.62 10 13 Olofsson et al. (2018)
TW A 11/ HR4796 A0V 5.77 10 76.4 Milli et al. (2017c)
HIP 64995 / HD 115600 F2IV /V 8.14 16 80 Gibbs et al. (2019)
NZ Lup G2 7.78 16 86 Boccaletti et al. (2019)
Sixteen substellar companions around twelve host stars have
been detected within the ﬁrst half of the SHINE survey, eight
brown dwarfs and eight planetary-mass companions. The paper
summarizes the measured position, contrast, and derived mass
for each companion as well as it produces astro-photometric data
for all the candidates detections. The two new discoveries in the
ﬁrst half of the SHINE survey are the planetary mass companion
to HIP 65426 b (Chauvin et al. 2017b) and the brown dwarf com-
panion to HIP 64892 B (Cheetham et al. 2018). All other substel-
lar companions characterized during SHINE were discovered in
previous direct imaging campaigns.
The SHINE survey is due to be completed in 2021, but will
certainly extend over a few more years to become complete in
terms of follow-up for all candidates within at least a 300 au
and possibly even farther away. The ﬁnal sample will include
over 500 stars, which will make SHINE the largest high contrast
imaging survey to date, covering from B to M stars in the solar
neighborhood. The reanalysis of the complete SHINE data with
advanced processing techniques (Cantalloube et al. 2015; Ruﬃo
et al. 2017; Flasseur et al. 2018, 2020b,a; Berdeu et al. 2020)
will be performed in order to provide improved detection limits
and reach the full power of this survey using the full sample.
There are a limited number of bright, young, nearby stars
available to high-contrast direct imagers like SPHERE and GPI.
As a result, at the current achievable contrasts we cannot expect
a signiﬁcant number of new detections of imaged giant planets
following the completion of both GPIES and SPHERE /SHINE
(Desidera et al. (submitted)) campaigns. An improvement in per-
formance from instrument upgrades (Boccaletti et al. (2020),
Chilcote et al. (2018) ), however, could unlock mass /separation
phase space around these target stars that are currently inacces-
sible, which are in addition likely to host more planets Wagner
et al. (2019). Additional planets discovered with upgraded GPI
and SPHERE would allow us to test the robustness of the trends
with stellar mass and planetary mass uncovered in this paper.
The Gaia mission will identify astrometric signatures of planets
that may be conﬁrmed with direct imaging, which can also boost
the number of companions in this separation range. Finally, cross
checks with results from other indirect techniques, e.g. transits
or high precision radial velocity, will allow a much better picture
of the architecture of planetary systems.
Acknowledgements. SPHERE is an instrument designed and built by a con-
sortium consisting of IPAG (Grenoble, France), MPIA (Heidelberg, Ger-
many), LAM (Marseille, France), LESIA (Paris, France), Laboratoire La-
grange (Nice, France), INAF - Osservatorio di Padova (Italy), Observatoire de
Genève (Switzerland), ETH Zürich (Switzerland), NOV A (Netherlands), ON-
ERA (France) and ASTRON (Netherlands) in collaboration with ESO. SPHERE
was funded by ESO, with additional contributions from CNRS (France),
MPIA (Germany), INAF (Italy), FINES (Switzerland) and NOV A (Netherlands).
SPHERE also received funding from the European Commission Sixth and Sev-
enth Framework Programmes as part of the Optical Infrared Coordination Net-
work for Astronomy (OPTICON) under grant number RII3-Ct-2004-001566 for
FP6 (2004-2008), grant number 226604 for FP7 (2009-2012) and grant num-
ber 312430 for FP7 (2013-2016). This work has made use of the SPHERE Data
Centre, jointly operated by OSUG/IPAG (Grenoble), PYTHEAS/LAM/CeSAM
(Marseille), OCA /Lagrange (Nice), Observatoire de Paris /LESIA (Paris), and
Observatoire de Lyon (OSUL/CRAL).This work is supported by the French Na-
tional Research Agency in the framework of the Investissements d’Avenir pro-
gram (ANR-15-IDEX-02), through the funding of the "Origin of Life" project
of the Univ. Grenoble-Alpes. This work is jointly supported by the French Na-
tional Programms (PNP and PNPS) and by the Action Spéciﬁque Haute Réso-
lution Angulaire (ASHRA) of CNRS/INSU co-funded by CNES. We also thank
the anonymous referee for her /his careful reading of the manuscript as well as
her/his insightful comments and suggestions. A V acknowledges funding from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 757561). A-M La-
grange acknowledges funding from French National Research Agency (GIPSE
project). C. P. acknowledge ﬁnancial support from Fondecyt (grant 3190691)
and ﬁnancial support from the ICM (Iniciativa Cientíﬁca Milenio) via the Núcleo
Milenio de Formación Planetaria grant, from the Universidad de Valparaíso. T.H.
acknowledges support from the European Research Council under the Horizon
2020 Framework Program via the ERC Advanced Grant Origins 83 24 28.
References
Baraﬀe, I., Chabrier, G., Barman, T. S., Allard, F., & Hauschildt, P. H. 2003,
A&A, 402, 701
Bellini, A., Anderson, J., & Bedin, L. R. 2011, PASP, 123, 622
Bellini, A., Anderson, J., van der Marel, R. P., et al. 2014, ApJ, 797, 115
Bellini, A., Bianchini, P., Varri, A. L., et al. 2017, ApJ, 844, 167
Berdeu, A., Soulez, F., Denis, L., Langlois, M., & Thiébaut, É. 2020, A&A, 635,
A90
Beuzit, J. L., Vigan, A., Mouillet, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A155
Biller, B. A., Close, L. M., Masciadri, E., et al. 2007, ApJS, 173, 143
Biller, B. A., Liu, M. C., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2010, ApJ, 720, L82
Biller, B. A., Liu, M. C., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 160
Boccaletti, A., Carbillet, M., Fusco, T., et al. 2008, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 7015, Adaptive
Optics Systems, 70156E
Boccaletti, A., Chauvin, G., Mouillet, D., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2003.05714
Boccaletti, A., Sezestre, E., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2018, A&A, 614, A52
Boccaletti, A., Thébault, P., Pawellek, N., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A21
Bohn, A. J., Kenworthy, M. A., Ginski, C., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, L16
Bonnefoy, M., Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2014, A&A, 562, A127
Bonnefoy, M., Perraut, K., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2018, A&A, 618, A63
Article number, page 18 of 30

<<<PAGE 19>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Bonnefoy, M., Zurlo, A., Baudino, J. L., et al. 2016, A&A, 587, A58
Boss, A. P. 1997, in Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Lunar and Plane-
tary Science Conference, 137
Bowler, B. P., Liu, M. C., Shkolnik, E. L., & Tamura, M. 2015, ApJS, 216, 7
Burrows, A., Marley, M., Hubbard, W. B., et al. 1997, ApJ, 491, 856
Cantalloube, F., Farley, O. J. D., Milli, J., et al. 2020, A&A, 638, A98
Cantalloube, F., Mouillet, D., Mugnier, L. M., et al. 2015, A&A, 582, A89
Cantalloube, F., Por, E. H., Dohlen, K., et al. 2018, A&A, 620, L10
Carbillet, M., Bendjoya, P., Abe, L., et al. 2011, Experimental Astronomy, 30,
39
Chauvin, G., Desidera, S., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2017a, in SF2A-2017: Pro-
ceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and As-
trophysics, ed. C. Reylé, P. Di Matteo, F. Herpin, E. Lagadec, A. Lançon,
Z. Meliani, & F. Royer, Di
Chauvin, G., Desidera, S., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2017b, A&A, 605, L9
Chauvin, G., Faherty, J., Boccaletti, A., et al. 2012, A&A, 548, A33
Chauvin, G., Gratton, R., Bonnefoy, M., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, A76
Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., Bonavita, M., et al. 2010, A&A, 509, A52
Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., Dumas, C., et al. 2004, A&A, 425, L29
Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., Lacombe, F., et al. 2005a, A&A, 430, 1027
Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., Zuckerman, B., et al. 2005b, A&A, 438, L29
Chauvin, G., Thomson, M., Dumas, C., et al. 2003, A&A, 404, 157
Cheetham, A., Bonnefoy, M., Desidera, S., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A160
Cheetham, A. C., Samland, M., Brems, S. S., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A80
Chilcote, J. K., Bailey, V . P., De Rosa, R., et al. 2018, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 10702, Proc. SPIE,
1070244
Claudi, R. U., Turatto, M., Gratton, R. G., et al. 2008, in Ground-based and
Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy II, V ol. 7014, 70143E
Close, L. M., Males, J. R., Morzinski, K., et al. 2013, ApJ, 774, 94
Close, L. M., Puglisi, A., Males, J. R., et al. 2012, ApJ, 749, 180
Cumming, A., Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2008, PASP, 120, 531
De Rosa, R. J., Nguyen, M. M., Chilcote, J., et al. 2019, JATIS, subm.,
arXiv:1910.08659
De Rosa, R. J., Rameau, J., Patience, J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 824, 121
Delorme, P., Lagrange, A. M., Chauvin, G., et al. 2012, A&A, 539, A72
Delorme, P., Meunier, N., Albert, D., et al. 2017a, in SF2A-2017: Proceedings
of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Di
Delorme, P., Schmidt, T., Bonnefoy, M., et al. 2017b, A&A, 608, A79
Desidera, S., Chauvin, G., Bonavita, M., & SHINE consortium. submitted, A&A
Dohlen, K., Langlois, M., Saisse, M., et al. 2008, in Ground-based and Airborne
Instrumentation for Astronomy II, V ol. 7014, 70143L
Dupuy, T. J., Liu, M. C., Magnier, E. A., et al. 2020, Research Notes of the
American Astronomical Society, 4, 54
Ehrenreich, D., Lagrange, A. M., Montagnier, G., et al. 2010, A&A, 523, A73
Engler, N., Boccaletti, A., Schmid, H. M., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A192
Esposito, T. M., Kalas, P., Fitzgerald, M. P., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2004.13722
Feldt, M., Olofsson, J., Boccaletti, A., et al. 2017, A&A, 601, A7
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2018, A&A, 618, A138
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2020a, A&A, 637, A9
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2020b, A&A, 634, A2
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, E., & Langlois, M. submitted, A&A
Fusco, T., Rousset, G., Sauvage, J. F., et al. 2006, Optics Express, 14, 7515
Fusco, T., Sauvage, J.-F., Mouillet, D., et al. 2016, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 9909,
Adaptive Optics Systems V , 99090U
Fusco, T., Sauvage, J.-F., Petit, C., et al. 2014, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 9148, Adaptive
Optics Systems IV , 1
Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, A1
Galicher, R., Boccaletti, A., Mesa, D., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A92
Galicher, R. & Marois, C. 2011, in Second International Conference
on Adaptive Optics for Extremely Large Telescopes. Online at <A
href=“http://ao4elt2.lesia.obspm.fr”>http://ao4elt2.lesia.obspm.fr</A, P25
Gibbs, A., Wagner, K., Apai, D., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 39
Guerri, G., Daban, J.-B., Robbe-Dubois, S., et al. 2011, Experimental Astron-
omy, 30, 59
Haﬀert, S. Y ., Por, E. H., Keller, C. U., et al. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1803.10693
Harayama, Y ., Eisenhauer, F., & Martins, F. 2008, ApJ, 675, 1319
Hennebelle, P. & Chabrier, G. 2011, ApJ, 743, L29
Hinkley, S., Bowler, B. P., Vigan, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 805, L10
Janson, M., Bonavita, M., Klahr, H., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, 89
Jovanovic, N., Guyon, O., Lozi, J., et al. 2016, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 9909, Proc. SPIE,
99090W
Kasper, M., Apai, D., Janson, M., & Brandner, W. 2007, A&A, 472, 321
Keppler, M., Benisty, M., Müller, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, A44
Khorrami, Z., Lanz, T., Vakili, F., et al. 2016, A&A, 588, L7
Konopacky, Q. M., Rameau, J., Duchêne, G., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, L4
Kuzuhara, M., Tamura, M., Kudo, T., et al. 2013a, ApJ, 774, 11
Kuzuhara, M., Tamura, M., Kudo, T., et al. 2013b, ApJ, 774, 11
Lafrenière, D., Doyon, R., Marois, C., et al. 2007, ApJ, 670, 1367
Lafrenière, D., Jayawardhana, R., Janson, M., et al. 2011, ApJ, 730, 42
Lagrange, A. M., Boccaletti, A., Langlois, M., et al. 2019, A&A, 621, L8
Lagrange, A. M., Gratadour, D., Chauvin, G., et al. 2009, A&A, 493, L21
Lagrange, A.-M., Rubini, P., Brauner-Vettier, N., et al. 2016, in Proc. SPIE, V ol.
9910, Observatory Operations: Strategies, Processes, and Systems VI, 991033
Lannier, J., Delorme, P., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2016, A&A, 596, A83
Lowrance, P. J., Schneider, G., Kirkpatrick, J. D., et al. 2000, ApJ, 541, 390
Macintosh, B., Graham, J. R., Barman, T., et al. 2015, Science, 350, 64
Maire, A. L., Bonnefoy, M., Ginski, C., et al. 2016a, A&A, 587, A56
Maire, A.-L., Langlois, M., Dohlen, K., et al. 2016b, in Ground-based and Air-
borne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI, V ol. 9908, 990834
Maire, A. L., Rodet, L., Cantalloube, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 624, A118
Makidon, R. B., Sivaramakrishnan, A., Perrin, M. D., et al. 2005, PASP, 117, 831
Marleau, G.-D., Coleman, G. A. L., Leleu, A., & Mordasini, C. 2019, A&A, 624,
A20
Marleau, G.-D. & Cumming, A. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 1378
Marley, M. S., Fortney, J. J., Hubickyj, O., Bodenheimer, P., & Lissauer, J. J.
2007, ApJ, 655, 541
Marois, C., Correia, C., Véran, J.-P., & Currie, T. 2014, in IAU Symposium,
V ol. 299, Exploring the Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems, ed.
M. Booth, B. C. Matthews, & J. R. Graham, 48–49
Marois, C., Lafrenière, D., Doyon, R., Macintosh, B., & Nadeau, D. 2006, ApJ,
641, 556
Marois, C., Macintosh, B., Barman, T., et al. 2008, Science, 322, 1348
Marois, C., Zuckerman, B., Konopacky, Q. M., Macintosh, B., & Barman, T.
2010, Nature, 468, 1080
Masciadri, E., Mundt, R., Henning, T., Alvarez, C., & Barrado y Navascués, D.
2005, ApJ, 625, 1004
Mawet, D., Milli, J., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2014, ApJ, 792, 97
Mesa, D., Gratton, R., Zurlo, A., et al. 2015, A&A, 576, A121
Mesa, D., Keppler, M., Cantalloube, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A25
Meshkat, T., Mawet, D., Bryan, M. L., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 245
Milli, J., Hibon, P., Christiaens, V ., et al. 2017a, A&A, 597, L2
Milli, J., Mouillet, D., Fusco, T., et al. 2017b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1710.05417
Milli, J., Mouillet, D., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2012, A&A, 545, A111
Milli, J., Vigan, A., Mouillet, D., et al. 2017c, A&A, 599, A108
Mugrauer, M., V ogt, N., Neuhäuser, R., & Schmidt, T. O. B. 2010, A&A, 523,
L1
Müller, A., Keppler, M., Henning, T., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, L2
Nakajima, T., Oppenheimer, B. R., Kulkarni, S. R., et al. 1995, Nature, 378, 463
Nielsen, E. L., De Rosa, R. J., Macintosh, B., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 13
Nielsen, E. L., Liu, M. C., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2013, ApJ, 776, 4
Olofsson, J., Samland, M., Avenhaus, H., et al. 2016, A&A, 591, A108
Olofsson, J., van Holstein, R. G., Boccaletti, A., et al. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1804.01929
Pairet, B., Cantalloube, F., & Jacques, L. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2008.05170
Parravano, A., McKee, C. F., & Hollenbach, D. J. 2011, ApJ, 726, 27
Pavlov, A., Möller-Nilsson, O., Feldt, M., et al. 2008, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 7019, Proc. SPIE,
701939
Perrot, Clément, Thebault, Philippe, Lagrange, Anne-Marie, et al. 2019, A&A,
626, A95
Petit, C., Sauvage, J.-F., Sevin, A., et al. 2012, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 8447, Adaptive
Optics Systems III, 84471Z
Rameau, J., Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2013a, ApJ, 772, L15
Rameau, J., Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2013b, A&A, 553, A60
Rochau, B., Brandner, W., Stolte, A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 716, L90
Ruﬃo, J.-B., Macintosh, B., Wang, J. J., et al. 2017, ApJ, 842, 14
Samland, M., Mollière, P., Bonnefoy, M., et al. 2017, A&A, 603, A57
Sauvage, J.-F., Fusco, T., Petit, C., et al. 2016, Journal of Astronomical Tele-
scopes, Instruments, and Systems, 2, 025003
Sissa, E., Olofsson, J., Vigan, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 613, L6
Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163
Soto, M., Bellini, A., Anderson, J., et al. 2017, AJ, 153, 19
Soummer, R., Pueyo, L., & Larkin, J. 2012, ApJ, 755, L28
Spiegel, D. S. & Burrows, A. 2012, ApJ, 745, 174
Vigan, A., Fontanive, C., Meyer, M., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2007.06573
Vigan, A., Gry, C., Salter, G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 454, 129
Vigan, A., Moutou, C., Langlois, M., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 407, 71
Wagner, K., Apai, D., Kasper, M., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2009.08537
Wagner, K., Apai, D., & Kratter, K. M. 2019, ApJ, 877, 46
Wahhaj, Z., Liu, M. C., Biller, B. A., et al. 2011, ApJ, 729, 139
Wang, J., Mawet, D., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 272
Zurlo, A., Vigan, A., Galicher, R., et al. 2016, A&A, 587, A57
Zurlo, A., Vigan, A., Mesa, D., et al. 2014, A&A, 572, A85
Article number, page 19 of 30

<<<PAGE 20>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
1 CRAL, UMR 5574, CNRS, Université de Lyon, ENS, 9 avenue
Charles André, 69561 Saint Genis Laval Cedex, France
e-mail: maud.langlois@univ-lyon1.fr
2 Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CNES, LAM, Marseille, France
3 INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo della Osserva-
torio 5, 35122, Padova, Italy
4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, F-38000 Grenoble, France
5 LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne
Université, Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 5 place Jules
Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France
6 Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, Königstuhl 17, D-69117 Hei-
delberg, Germany
7 STAR Institute, Université de Liège, Allée du Six Août 19c, B-4000
Liège, Belgium
8 Geneva Observatory, University of Geneva, Chemin des Mailettes
51, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland
9 Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA
10 Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, ETH Zurich,
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland
11 Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, EH9 3HJ, Edin-
burgh, UK
12 Scottish Universities Physics Alliance (SUPA), Institute for Astron-
omy, University of Edinburgh, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ,
UK
13 Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, 3012 Bern,
Switzerland
14 Université Côte d’Azur, OCA, CNRS, Lagrange, France
15 European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 2, 85748
Garching, Germany
16 European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Cordova 3107, Casilla
19001 Vitacura, Santiago 19, Chile
17 Núcleo de Astronomía, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universi-
dad Diego Portales, Av. Ejercito 441, Santiago, Chile
18 Escuela de Ingeniería Industrial, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias,
Universidad Diego Portales, Av. Ejercito 441, Santiago, Chile
19 Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, Science Park 9, NL-1098
XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands
20 Unidad Mixta Internacional Franco-Chilena de Astronomía,
CNRS/INSU UMI 3386 and Departamento de Astronomía, Univer-
sidad de Chile, Casilla 36-D, Santiago, Chile
21 DOTA, ONERA (Oﬃce National dEtudes et de Recherches Arospa-
tiales), Université Paris Saclay, F-92322 Chatillon, France
22 NOV A Optical Infrared Instrumentation Group, Oude
Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD Dwingeloo, The Netherlands
23 INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte, Salita
Moiariello 16, 80131 Napoli, Italy
24 Instituto de Física y Astronomía, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de Valparaíso, Av. Gran Bretaña 1111, Valparaíso, Chile
25 Núcleo Milenio Formación Planetaria - NPF, Universidad de Val-
paraíso, Av. Gran Bretaña 1111, Valparaíso, Chile
26 Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate
School, Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-
ETIENNE, France
27 Dipartimento di Fisica a Astronomia "G. Galilei", Universita’ di
Padova, Via Marzolo, 8, 35121 Padova, Italy
28 Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, AlbaNova Uni-
versity Center, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden
29 Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
30 Ural Federal University, Yekaterinburg, 620002, Russia
31 INAF- Catania Astrophysical Observatory, via S. Soﬁa 78, I-95123
Catania, Italy
Article number, page 20 of 30

<<<PAGE 21>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 10: SPHERE IRDIS and IFS mass detection limits. The IFS H data are represented in blue, the IFS YJ data are represented in
violet, while the IRDIS H23 and IRDIS K12 data are represented respectively in green and red. The limits have been converted into
mass using the COND-2003 evolutionary models (Baraﬀe et al. 2003).
Article number, page 21 of 30

<<<PAGE 22>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Fig. 11: Black symbols: SPHERE contrast spectra of substellar companions detected within the sample of stars considered in this
paper. Upper row: left: 51 Eri b; center: β Pic b; right: HD 95086 b; Middle row: left: HIP 65426 b; center: HR 8799 d; right:
HR 8799 e. Lower row: left: HIP 107412 B; center: PZ Tel B. Results shown are obtained by making a median of results at diﬀerent
epochs with good quality results. Spectra obtained with the YJ and YH mode were kept separate. The error bar is either the result
of the scatter of results at di ﬀerent epochs, or if only one was available in that epoch, the error bar obtained by considering other
positions at the same separation from the star. The spectra shown are obtained using ASDI PCA, and corrected for the attenuation
factor using fake planets at similar separation. This method is reasonable when the contrast is very large, so that the planet cannot be
seen well at individual wavelengths. Red symbols: contrast values obtained from IRDIS data.Note that there is some oﬀset between
IFS and IRDIS contrasts. This is at least in part due to the non optimal extraction of IFS spectra shown in this Figure. More accurate
spectral extractions may be found in the papers about the individual targets.
Article number, page 22 of 30

<<<PAGE 23>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Fig. 12: Gallery of images of debris disks in the F100 sample detected with IFS. Some of detection is very marginal (e.g. HIP86598)
. The disk is not detectable for TW A7 and HIP682 (it was however detected with SPHERE using other approaches). Whenever
possible, we combined several images to have a cleaner detection. This is the reason the planet is not visible in the beta Pic image.
Generally, we used ASDI PCA with 25 modes, that is a quite conservative method, and smoothed the images to have a better view.
In each panel, the green cross mark the star position
Article number, page 23 of 30

<<<PAGE 24>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Fig. 13: Gallery of images of debris disks in the F100 sample detected with IRDIS obatained using PCA with 5 modes in H2. Some
of detections are marginal they are however better detected with other signal extraction approaches.
Article number, page 24 of 30

<<<PAGE 25>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Appendix A: Detection Astrophotometric Table
Article number, page 25 of 30

<<<PAGE 26>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
Table A.1: Detected point sources parameters (see electronic version for the full table)
Main_ID date ﬁlt ncc id sep(mas) sep pa(deg) pa dm0 dm0 dm1 dm1 absm0 absm0 absm1 absm1 snr0 snr1 proba color status
error error error error error error
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 0.0 618.58 9.46 148.66 1.07 12.37 0.16 11.91 0.27 14.48 0.16 14.01 0.27 9.17 4.28 1.48 0.466 C
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 1.0 2212.95 17.41 35.14 0.41 13.02 0.12 13.13 0.21 15.13 0.13 15.24 0.21 17.28 5.81 22.24 -0.111 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 2.0 2331.48 39.49 305.16 0.8 0 1.09 13.64 0.34 2.11 1.09 15.75 0.34 0 3.37 29.74 -13.641 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 3.0 4064.85 21.13 140.74 0.1 11.87 0.11 11.79 0.11 13.98 0.11 13.89 0.12 40.09 17.63 39.61 0.086 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 4.0 4432.96 22.47 320.19 0.07 6.35 0.11 6.26 0.1 8.45 0.11 8.37 0.1 88.62 105.39 1.42 0.084 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 5.0 4669.81 23.82 246.71 0.07 11.21 0.11 11.06 0.1 13.31 0.11 13.17 0.11 43.92 29.37 37.46 0.143 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 6.0 5024.38 28.76 244.75 0.13 13.17 0.12 13.16 0.32 15.27 0.12 15.27 0.32 18.23 3.62 74.52 0.005 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 7.0 5204.32 27.25 238.69 0.09 13.62 0.13 0 1.09 15.73 0.13 2.11 1.09 16.12 0 81.89 13.619 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 8.0 5585.85 28.78 322.51 0.09 12.02 0.11 11.97 0.15 14.12 0.11 14.08 0.15 31.09 9.21 63.66 0.048 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 9.0 5817.68 29.73 324 0.08 11.63 0.11 11.51 0.11 13.73 0.11 13.62 0.11 35.02 18.32 59.45 0.114 B
HIP53524 05/05/15 K12 11 10.0 6192.48 31.54 105.04 0.07 11.29 0.11 11.24 0.11 13.39 0.11 13.34 0.11 33.59 22.64 57.65 0.047 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 0.0 631.9 5.65 145.52 0.63 12.27 0.08 11.83 0.14 14.37 0.08 13.93 0.14 19.91 8.82 1.46 0.439 C
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 1.0 2248.47 8.96 38.04 0.26 13.12 0.09 13.03 0.24 15.23 0.1 15.14 0.24 14 4.76 23.68 0.095 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 2.0 4120.91 24.28 175.67 3.28 14.16 0.13 14.2 0.39 16.27 0.13 16.31 0.39 8.91 2.83 73.05 -0.039 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 3.0 4157.41 6.8 140.03 0.09 12.07 0.06 11.94 0.09 14.17 0.07 14.05 0.09 30.94 14.86 43.89 0.126 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 4.0 4345.53 6.01 320.9 0.07 6.25 0.06 6.18 0.06 8.35 0.06 8.28 0.06 38.34 52.26 1.23 0.071 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 5.0 4608.14 245.48 0 1.09 0 1.09 2.11 1.09 2.11 1.09 0 0 0.01 0 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 6.0 4953.55 12.75 243.92 0.11 13.15 0.07 13.3 0.29 15.25 0.08 15.41 0.29 20.6 3.84 73.16 -0.157 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 7.0 5135.98 15.49 237.8 0.14 13.5 0.09 13.77 0.56 15.61 0.1 15.87 0.56 13.91 1.96 79.82 -0.266 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 8.0 5501.79 8.1 323.15 0.08 11.89 0.06 11.84 0.08 14 0.07 13.95 0.08 31.18 22 60.31 0.054 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 9.0 5774.7 325.03 0 1.09 0 1.09 2.11 1.09 2.11 1.09 0 0 0.02 0 B
HIP53524 28/03/18 K12 11 10.0 6292.78 9.14 105.18 0.07 11.48 0.08 11.42 0.08 13.58 0.08 13.53 0.08 18.98 20.73 62.31 0.053 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 0.0 628.43 4.76 144.11 0.53 12.21 0.14 11.72 0.13 14.32 0.14 13.83 0.13 27.33 17.6 1.4 0.492 C
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 1.0 2268.61 9.16 39.36 0.26 13.08 0.14 13.29 0.23 15.19 0.14 15.4 0.23 22.04 5.25 23.72 -0.21 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 2.0 4201.34 3.81 139.74 0.08 11.97 0.14 11.82 0.12 14.08 0.14 13.92 0.12 51.51 26.64 43.16 0.155 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 3.0 4305.8 2.67 321.2 0.07 6.36 0.14 6.28 0.11 8.47 0.14 8.38 0.11 51.96 80.05 1.36 0.088 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 4.0 4562.91 3.67 245.38 0.07 11.28 0.14 11.14 0.12 13.39 0.14 13.25 0.12 40.38 33.68 37.36 0.143 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 5.0 4922.52 10.86 243.49 0.12 13.24 0.15 13.27 0.2 15.34 0.15 15.38 0.21 19.19 6.33 74.05 -0.036 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 6.0 5462.93 4.69 323.43 0.08 12.01 0.14 11.96 0.12 14.12 0.14 14.07 0.12 34.68 21.48 61.93 0.052 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 7.0 5697.63 4.18 324.9 0.08 11.61 0.14 11.53 0.12 13.71 0.14 13.63 0.12 35.06 28.29 57.6 0.08 B
HIP53524 18/05/19 K12 9 8.0 6339.33 4.79 105.24 0.07 11.43 0.14 11.35 0.12 13.53 0.15 13.45 0.12 20.34 24.84 61.93 0.082 B
Article number, page 26 of 30

<<<PAGE 27>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
Appendix B: Contrast PLots
Article number, page 27 of 30

<<<PAGE 28>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
IRDIS RAW CONTRASTS IRDIS PROCESSED CONTRASTS
Fig. B.1: IRDIS raw (Left) and processed (Right) contrasts in H2 band at various separations computed using TLOCI estimated as
function of the observing conditions in irdifs mode. Blue is for 100 mas separation, black for 500 mas separation, red for 1000 mas
separation, green for 2000 mas separation and yellow for 4000 mas separations. The seeing is expressed in arcseconds and theτ0 in
milliseconds.
Article number, page 28 of 30

<<<PAGE 29>>>
M. Langlois et al.: The SPHERE infrared survey for exoplanets (SHINE). II.
//
Fig. B.2: 5sigma IRDIS processed contrasts at various separations computed using TLOCI estimated as function of the observing
conditions (airmass and rotation angle) in irdifs mode. Blue is for 100 mas separation, black for 500 mas separation, red for 1000
mas separation , green for 2000 mas separation and yellow for 4000 mas separations.
Fig. B.3: IRDIFS Contrasts estimated at various separations as function of the sample stars V and H magnitude. Both IRDIS and
IFS contrasts are shown separatly. IRDIS contrasts using PCA reduction and TLOCI (Left and middle ﬁgures). The color code for
IRDIS s as follow. Blue is for 100 mas separation, black for 500 mas separation, red for 1000 mas separation , green for 2000 mas
separation and yellow for 4000 mas separations.IFS contrasts using PCA-ASDI reduction are shown on the right side ﬁgure. The
color code for IFS is as follow. Blue is for 100 mas separation, orange is for 200 mas separation, pink is for 400 mas separation,
black for 500 mas separation, brown is for 700 mas separations.
Article number, page 29 of 30

<<<PAGE 30>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. paperF100IIﬁnalb
IFS RAW CONTRASTS IFS PROCESSED CONTRASTS
Fig. B.4: IFS raw (Left) and processed (Right) contrasts in YJ bands at various separations computed using PCA ASDI estimated
as function of the observing conditions in irdifs mode. Blue is for 100 mas separation, orange for 200 mas separation and pink for
400 mas separations, black for 500 mas separation, , brown for 700 mas separation.
Article number, page 30 of 30