<<<PAGE 1>>>
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. language_editing_binarity c⃝ESO 2020
July 21, 2020
The search for disks or planetary objects around directly imaged
companions: A candidate around DH Tau B. ⋆
C. Lazzoni1, 2, A. Zurlo3, 4, 5, S. Desidera1, D. Mesa1, C. Fontanive6, 1, M. Bonavita1, 7, S. Ertel8, 9, K. Rice7, A. Vigan5,
A. Boccaletti10, M. Bonnefoy11, G. Chauvin12, 11, P. Delorme11, R. Gratton1, M. Houllé5, A.L. Maire13, 14, M.
Meyer15, 16, E. Rickman17, E. A. Spalding9, 18, R. Asensio-Torres13, M. Langlois19, 5, A. Müller13, J-L. Baudino10, 20,
J.-L. Beuzit11, 5, B. Biller13, 7, W. Brandner13, E. Buenzli16, F. Cantalloube13, A. Cheetham13, 17, M. Cudel11, M.
Feldt13, R. Galicher10, M. Janson13, 21, J. Hagelberg17, T. Henning13, M. Kasper11, 22, M. Keppler13, A.-M. Lagrange11,
J. Lannier11, H. LeCoroller5, D. Mouillet11, S. Peretti17, C. Perrot10, G. Salter5, M. Samland13, T. Schmidt10, E. Sissa1,
and F. Wildi17
(Aﬃliations can be found after the references)
July 21, 2020
ABSTRACT
Context. In recent decades, thousands of substellar companions have been discovered with both indirect and direct methods of detection. While
the majority of the sample is populated by objects discovered using radial velocity and transit techniques, an increasing number have been directly
imaged. These planets and brown dwarfs are extraordinary sources of information that help in rounding out our understanding of planetary systems.
Aims. In this paper, we focus our attention on substellar companions detected with the latter technique, with the primary goal of investigating their
close surroundings and looking for additional companions and satellites, as well as disks and rings. Any such discovery would shed light on many
unresolved questions, particularly with regard to their possible formation mechanisms.
Methods. To reveal bound features of directly imaged companions, whether for point-like or extended sources, we need to suppress the contribution
from the source itself. Therefore, we developed a method based on the negative fake companion (NEGFC) technique that ﬁrst estimates the position
in the ﬁeld of view (FoV) and the ﬂux of the imaged companion with high precision, then subtracts a rescaled model point spread function (PSF)
from the imaged companion, using either an image of the central star or another PSF in the FoV . Next it performs techniques, such as angular
diﬀerential imaging (ADI), to further remove quasi-static patterns of the star (i.e., speckle contaminants) that a ﬀect the residuals of close-in
companions.
Results. After testing our tools on simulated companions and disks and on systems that were chosen ad hoc, we applied the method to the sample of
substellar objects observed with SPHERE during the SHINE GTO survey. Among the 27 planets and brown dwarfs we analyzed, most objects did
not show remarkable features, which was as expected, with the possible exception of a point source close to DH Tau B. This candidate companion
was detected in four di ﬀerent SPHERE observations, with an estimated mass of ∼ 1 MJup, and a mass ratio with respect to the brown dwarf of
1/10. This binary system, if conﬁrmed, would be the ﬁrst of its kind, opening up interesting questions for the formation mechanism, evolution,
and frequency of such pairs. In order to address the latter, the residuals and contrasts reached for 25 companions in the sample of substellar objects
observed with SPHERE were derived. If the DH Tau Bb companion is real, the binary fraction obtained is∼ 7%, which is in good agreement with
the results obtained for ﬁeld brown dwarfs.
Conclusions. While there may currently be many limitations aﬀecting the exploration of bound features to directly imaged exoplanets and brown
dwarfs, next-generation instruments from the ground and space (i.e., JWST, ELT, and LUVOIR) will be able to image fainter objects and, thus,
drive the application of this technique in upcoming searches for exo-moons and circumplanetary disks.
Key words. Instrumentation: adaptive optics; Techniques: image processing; Planets and satellites: detection, formation; (Stars:) brown dwarfs;
(Stars:) individual: DH Tau
1. Introduction
To improve our knowledge and comprehension of how planets
form and evolve in their environments, their close neighbor-
hoods must be investigated. In our own Solar System, planets
are often surrounded by satellites and disk-like features, such as
dusty rings (Alibert et al. 2005). Moreover, these elements seem
to increase in number and extensions with the mass of the central
planet. Although there has been a tentative detection of a Saturn-
like moon around Kepler-1625 b Teachey & Kipping (2018) and
a report of a disk or ring-like system candidate orbiting the pre-
⋆ Based on observations collected at Paranal Observatory, ESO
(Chile) Program ID: 095.C-0298, 096.C-0241, 097.C-0865, 198.C-
0209, and 0104.C-0327(A) and on observations collected at LBT Ob-
servatory.
main-sequence star 1SW ASP J140747.93-394542.6 from a com-
plex photometric dimming event (Mamajek et al. 2012), there
has been no exomoon, or exoring, conﬁrmed yet. Another case
that is still under debate is that of Fomalhaut b (Lawler et al.
2015), in which the spectral energy distribution was interpreted
as the presence of a cloud of dust and planetesimals around a
low-mass planet, indicating the presence of an extended source,
even if more recent studies have suggested that Fomalhaut b is
not a planet but the result of a collision between two large plan-
etesimals (Gaspar & Rieke 2020).
With the current instrumentation and telescopes, the hunt for
features comparable to those observed in the Solar System is
considerably challenging for any detection technique. However,
we would expect the mass of a disk surrounding a substellar ob-
Article number, page 1 of 19
arXiv:2007.10097v1  [astro-ph.EP]  20 Jul 2020

<<<PAGE 2>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
ject to scale with the mass of the companion itself (Magni &
Coradini 2004); satellites and ring systems should also follow
such trends (Ward & Canup 2010). Thus, the ideal targets for
investigation for bound features would be massive companions
spanning the regime from a few Jupiter masses to brown dwarfs.
The detectability is further improved for young systems in which
planets are still in the thermal emission regime and circumplan-
etary disks are more likely to be present. Direct imaging instru-
ments such as GPI (Macintosh et al. 2014) and SPHERE (Beuzit
et al. 2019) might be used at the extremity of their potential in
the search for features around directly imaged planets and brown
dwarfs.
Additional advantages arise when considering giant planets
and brown dwarfs at wide separations. Indeed, the gravitational
inﬂuence of a substellar object, as measured by the radius of
the Hill Sphere, increases with the mass and the separation from
the host star. Then, not only can we expect to ﬁnd bound fea-
tures (disks, rings, satellites, etc.) placed at larger distances with
respect to such massive and wide companions but also the prob-
ability of interaction and pair formation of planets and brown
dwarfs is enhanced. For example, the Hill radius of a Jupiter-
mass planet at 1 au around a Sun-like star is roughly 0.07 au,
whereas, the same planet at 50 au has an Hill radius of more
than 3 au. A 50 M Jup brown dwarf at the same separations has
an Hill radius of 0.25 au and 12.57 au, respectively. Since typi-
cal separations of objects detected with the direct imaging tech-
nique are in tens of au, we may ﬁnd further companions inside
their Hill sphere up to few au and this would allow us to disen-
tangle the point spread functions (PSFs) of the two objects with
8-meter class telescopes equipped with xAO. Therefore, even if
the terrestrial regime is almost inaccessible for this generation
of instruments, we can still constrain upper limits for the mass
of the satellites, look for binary planets, and investigate the pres-
ence of extended structures such as disks and rings.
Pairs of brown dwarfs in wide orbits around stars have been
discovered in several studies, such asϵ Indi B (King et al. 2010),
GJ 569 B (Femenía et al. 2011), GJ 417 B (Kirkpatrick et al.
2001), HD130948 B (Potter et al. 2002) and AB Dor Ca/Cb (via
interferometry, Climent et al. 2019). This kind of conﬁguration
might extend to massive giant planets and brown dwarfs close
to deuterium burning limits. Isolated brown dwarfs or brown
dwarf-giant planet pairs have been already reported as well (e.g.,
Ophiucus 1622 2405 and 2MASS J1207334393254, Luhman
et al. 2007; Chauvin et al. 2004).
On the disk side, there are a number of conﬁrmed cases of
substellar companions down to planetary masses showing sig-
niﬁcant Hα or Paschen β emission. These are considered ro-
bust evidence of on-going accretion, as in the case of PDS 70
b (Wagner et al. 2018; Christiaens et al. 2019) and c (Ha ﬀert
et al. 2019), GQ Lup B (Seifahrt et al. 2007), DH Tau B (Bon-
nefoy et al. 2014), SR 12 C (Santamaría-Miranda et al. 2018),
and USCO1610 B (Petrus et al. 2020), although in certain other
cases the observed emission is most likely due to chromospheric
activity (Musso Barcucci et al. 2019; Petrus et al. 2020). Some
of these candidate circumplanetary disks were also conﬁrmed in
the submillimeter with ALMA, (PDS70 c, Isella et al. 2019),
while others, such as those surrounding GQ Lup B (MacGregor
et al. 2017) and DH Tau B (Long et al. 2019; Wol ﬀ et al. 2017;
Pérez et al. 2019), escaped detection at this wavelength.
Disk or ring-like features may form at later phases, as a result
of collisions that could happen either within a satellite system or
between a planet or satellites and an incoming body (Wyatt &
Jackson 2016). The latter case may happen more frequently for
stars surrounded by debris disks that scatter large bodies inwards
and outwards, increasing the chances of collisions with planets
or satellites (Hyodo et al. 2017).
In this paper, we present routines based on the fake negative
companion technique to suppress the contribution of directly im-
aged sources and investigate the residuals. These tools were sys-
tematically applied to every suitable substellar object, detected
during the SHINE /SPHERE survey (Chauvin et al. 2017a) to
unveil possible extended structures and to constrain their multi-
plicity. Since typical contrasts obtained with SPHERE are on the
order of 10−5− 10−6, for the youngest systems, the instrument
can probe down to a few Jupiter masses. Thus, as mentioned be-
fore, with the current instrumentation, we are not sensitive to So-
lar System-like rocky satellites but only to gas giant companions
and to bright and massive accretion disks. In this framework, we
present the ﬁrst indication of a Jupiter-like candidate that orbits
a low-mass brown dwarfs bound to DH Tau.
In this paper, we present a description of the method in Sect.
2 . In Sect. 3, we investigate the entire SPHERE sample and in
Sect. 4, we present the DH Tau Bb candidate companion. In Sect.
5, we show the detection limits and the statistics obtained for the
sample of substellar objects observed with SPHERE. In Sect. 6,
we present our conclusions. Finally, in App. A we present results
obtained by applying our tools to synthetic data and to systems
chosen ad hoc . In App. B, we describe the method used for the
reconstruction of the PSF of the star behind the coronagraph and
in App. C, we describe the reduction of the LMIRCam /LBTI
data for DH Tau B.
2. Methods
2.1. The NEGFC technique
In order to unveil the neighborhood of known companions de-
tected with direct imaging techniques, we need to carefully
subtract the contribution of the companion itself. We applied
the procedure known as the negative fake companion technique
(NEGFC, Lagrange et al. 2010; Marois et al. 2010) which, in
short, consists of forward modeling a detected source by inject-
ing a negative model of the instrument PSF into the raw data and
minimizing the residuals in the ﬁnal image after post-processing
by adjusting the PSF position and ﬂux.
As model PSF, we used, in general, the oﬀ-axis image of the
central star, which resemble the shape of the PSF of the com-
panion of interest. The frame containing the model should have
dimensions that are su ﬃcient to include several times the full
width half maximum (FWHM) of the PSF. This is needed in
order to reduce artifacts in the close vicinity of the companion
when subtracting the model. In SPHERE observations, for ex-
ample, the PSF template for IRDIS (see Section 3) is an image
of 64× 64 pixels (roughly 16 times the FWHM in the H-band
and 12 times in the K-band) of the central star, which is provided
by the SPHERE Data Center (Delorme et al. 2017a). Moreover,
all our tools rely on the angular di ﬀerential imaging technique
(ADI, Marois et al. 2006a) but they could also be used, in prin-
ciple, with diﬀerent post-processing techniques (for example, a
median of the frames).
We thus implemented the NEGFC in Python, starting from
the already released VIP code (Gomez Gonzalez et al. 2017)
and optimizing some of its functions to look for both bound ex-
tended features and point-like sources around directly imaged
companions. For the faintest objects and companions located in
the innermost regions dominated by speckle contaminants, we
assumed priors for the (r,θ, F) of the planet, subtracted a model
of the latter in each raw frame, and calculated the χ2 on a cir-
Article number, page 2 of 19

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
cular aperture centered on the companion in the post processed
image obtained with speciﬁc techniques, such as classical ADI
(cADI, Marois et al. 2006a) and the principal component analy-
sis (PCA, Soummer et al. 2012; Amara & Quanz 2012). The χ2
is deﬁned as a sum over the N positive values divided by N− 3,
if the function of merit is sum, or as the standard deviation over
the values diﬀerent from zero, if the function of merit is stddev.
The (r,θ, F) parameters are then optimized to minimize the χ2.
Here, we call this procedure the single_fullcube routine.
2.2. Evolutions of NEGFC
Since the single_fullcube routine is not able to take into account
the frame-by-frame variations of the ﬂux due to changing at-
mospheric conditions, we propose a ﬁrst evolution of NEGFC
for companions visible in each raw frame ( S/N ≳ 30). The sin-
gle_framebyframe routine determines (r,θ, F) for each frame of
the unprocessed dataset. Thesingle_fullcube routine is then used
to suppress the contribution of the faintest or closest companion,
whereas the single_framebyframe tool is applied at the brightest
or farthest point sources that are detectable in each raw frame
and that are clearly distinguishable from speckle contaminants.
For ground-based observations, the shape of PSFs over time
is not constant. Indeed, if parameters such as seeing or wind
speed change signiﬁcantly during the observation, the PSF of
the companion might be quite di ﬀerent from the ﬁrst to the last
frame of the cube. Also, in order to reach deeper contrasts, the
coronagraphic observations are very often the best choice for ex-
oplanets search. With this kind of setting, the star is hidden be-
hind the coronagraph and cannot be used as a model. Thus, we
need an image of the oﬀ-axis PSF of the star that might nonethe-
less diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the PSF of the companion since the
two are not taken simultaneously. When subtracting two PSFs
with diﬀerent shapes induced by surrounding conditions, spuri-
ous structures may emerge in the residuals. For coronagraphic
observations, then, the process of estimating the position and
ﬂux of directly imaged companions and the retrieval of features
in their residuals works more e ﬃciently for datasets taken in
good and stable weather conditions.
When, instead, the observations are taken without the coro-
nagraph, we can use the the star itself as a model PSF for
each of the frames in the cube. This second evolution of the
NEGFC, which uses more than one model PSF, is called themul-
tiple_framebyframe routine here. This tool helps to avoid even-
tual artifacts that may emerge from changes in the conditions
during the observation. Indeed, the model PSF and the PSF of
the companion are taken at the same time and, thus, they have
the same shape if their separation is not too large (otherwise,
anisoplanatism eﬀects may elongate the PSF and decrease the
Strehl ratio). On the other hand, with these kind of settings, the
processed images reach poor contrasts compared to a corona-
graphic sequence so that in order to distinguish structures around
the companion, or even the companion itself, we need to concen-
trate on brighter planets or brown dwarfs.
One further possibility to use the multiple_framebyframe
routine concerns datasets where there are more companions or
known background stars in the FoV of the instrument. To be
useful as models, such objects should be located in regions of
low speckle contaminant noise and with a similar radial sepa-
ration as the one of the companion under investigation. In any
case, the companion used to generate the model PSFs should be
very bright with a signal to noise ratio (S /N) on the order of 50
or greater. If this is the case, the peak is expected to be well
above the background and detectable in each raw frame. There-
fore, suitable point sources in the FoV to be converted into model
PSFs are quite rare. We show in Section 3.3 an example of the
gain in detection limits and improvement of the residuals for the
HD 1160 system. This was the only case with a point-like source
in the FoV that was bright enough to apply this routine.
It is worth mentioning the four replicas of the PSF of the cen-
tral star that are often used to measure the accurate position of
the star behind the coronagraph. These satellite spots would be,
in principle, perfect candidates of model PSFs present in each
frame of the cube (Marois et al. 2006b; Langlois et al. 2013),
especially for monochromatic observations for which there are
no radial elongations. Unfortunately, they are placed very close
to the outer working angle of the adaptive optics (AO), where
speckles dominate the background. Indeed, based on the pre-
liminary test run on real data, the results demonstrate that the
subtraction of the companion using satellite spots with the mul-
tiple_framebyframe is worse than the one obtained with the
single-PSF routines.
The output of each routine consists of: 1) an image of
the companion obtained from a post processed image (median,
cADI, or PCA +ADI) of the original cube; 2) an image of the
model obtained from the post-processing of an empty cube
where the model PSF is added in each frame at the position and
with the ﬂux obtained for the companion; 3) an image of the
residuals around the companion, obtained by processing (either
with a median, cADI, or PCA +ADI) the scientiﬁc cube from
which the companion was subtracted.
An additional output of each routine is the contrast curve
centered on the planet or the brown dwarf. The detection lim-
its are obtained by re-centering the post-processed frame from
which the companion was subtracted at the position of the com-
panion itself and calculating the standard deviation in concentric
annuli with a width of one FWHM each, starting from a separa-
tion of 1/2 FWHM from the center. The limits for the detection
are set at the 5σ level and they include the small sample statis-
tics following the discussion presented in Mawet et al. (2014)
and the algorithm throughput eﬀects (Jensen-Clem et al. 2018).
2.3. T ests on synthetic and real companions.
As a ﬁrst step, we tested our routines on synthetic companions.
A more detailed discussion is presented in Appendix A.1. The
most evident result is the gain in contrast close to the PSF of the
injected companion once the latter is subtracted. Furthermore,
we simulated a disk surrounding the synthetic companion with
diﬀerent inclinations and ﬁxed contrast and separation. The in-
clination of the system is, indeed, a fundamental parameter for
the detection of extended features, together with the luminosity
and the separation from the companion (see Appendix A.2). As
a result, we found that disk-like sources would also, in principle,
be detectable using the method presented in this paper.
We also tested our tools on real companions choosing two
ad hoc datasets. The ﬁrst system we analyzed was the crowded
FoV of HIP 87836, with many suitable PSFs that show signs of
binarity (see Appendix A.3). The second system was, instead,
chosen to prove the eﬃciency of the method to detect extended
features. We analyzed the HST observation of the additional stel-
lar companion that was recently discovered in orbit around GQ
Lup at wide separations. GQ Lup C (Alcalá et al. 2020) showed
evidence of the presence of a disk based on the infrared ex-
cess in its spectral energy distribution. We then applied the sin-
gle_framebyframe routine to resolve the disk in reﬂected light.
In each of the nine frames (one for each wavelength), we sub-
tracted a model obtained by a nearby star from the PSF of the
Article number, page 3 of 19

<<<PAGE 4>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
companion. The disk around GQ Lup C was easily detected with
an estimated width of 88 mas and an inclination of 44◦ (Lazzoni
et al. 2020).
3. SPHERE data
3.1. The SPHERE instrument
The components of SPHERE include an extreme adaptive optics
system, SAXO (Fusco et al. 2006; Petit et al. 2014), using 41
x 41 actuators, pupil stabilization, and di ﬀerential tip-tilt con-
trol. The instrument has several coronagraphic devices for stel-
lar diﬀraction suppression, including apodized pupil Lyot coro-
nagraphs (Carbillet et al. 2011) and achromatic four-quadrant
phase masks (Boccaletti et al. 2008).
Among the science subsystems available, we used only the
Infra-Red Dual-band Imager and Spectrograph (IRDIS, Dohlen
et al. 2008) observations, since IRDIS has a wider ﬁeld of view
and most of our targets are placed at few arcseconds. The stars in
our sample were observed in IRDIFS mode, with IRDIS in dual-
band imaging mode (DBI; Vigan et al. 2010), using the narrow-
band H2H3 ﬁlters ( λ = 1.593, 1.667µm), or in IRDIFS_EXT
mode, using the K1K2 ﬁlters (λ = 2.110, 2.251µm) of the instru-
ment. For one of the observations of HR 2562, the broad band H
ﬁlter (λ = 1.625µm) was used.
The IRDIS data were pre-reduced at the SPHERE data cen-
ter (Delorme et al. 2017a), hosted by OSUG /IPAG in Grenoble,
using the SPHERE Data Reduction Handling (DRH) pipeline
(Pavlov et al. 2008) and the dedicated Specal data reduction soft-
ware (Galicher et al. 2018)
3.2. The SPHERE sample
The methods and routines described and tested in the previous
Section and in the Appendix have as their primary objective the
discovery of (sub)planetary satellites and disks around compan-
ions detected with the direct imaging technique. For this rea-
son, we analyzed residuals around substellar companions de-
tected with SPHERE /VLT during the SpHere INfrared survey
for Exoplanets (SHINE, Desidera et. al, in prep.) guaranteed
time of observation (GTO) for 27 young systems hosting one or
more companions, with masses spanning from Jupiter to brown
dwarfs range. Among the sample we discarded TW A 5 B and
HD 284149 B because the central stars are close visual binaries
(Macintosh et al. 2001; Bonavita et al. 2017), thus the model
PSF obtained from the latter is not suitable for our purposes,
along with ROXs42 B and GSC 6214-210 B due to their poor or
short datasets.
In Table 1, we provide some brief information on the obser-
vations of the 23 systems in the sample and in Table 2, we list
the characteristics of the 27 objects in the analysis. Several of
the datasets have already been published in papers by the SHINE
team (references in Table 1) and others will be presented in detail
in forthcoming papers that are currently in preparation. The ages
were retrieved either from the literature or from those adopted
in SPHERE’s statistical paper (Langlois et al., in prep: Desidera
et al., in prep.; for a preliminary report see Meyer 2019) for the
objects observed in the ﬁrst half of the survey.
3.3. Results
Among the objects analyzed in the sample, we distinguish two
main categories regarding the residuals we obtained: 15 objects
(51 Eri b,β Pic b,GQ Lup B, HD1160 B, HD4747 B, HD95086
b, HIP65426 b, HIP107412 B, HR2562 B, HR3549 B, PDS 70
b, PZ Tel B, HR8799 c, d, and e) are located in the innermost
part of the system (within 1′′), in regions where speckle contam-
inants are very bright and mostly dominate the residuals once
the companion is subtracted. We show in Figure 1 an example of
this kind of system, HIP107412 B, with the brown dwarf placed
at 0.27”. The residuals are clearly dominated by bright speckles
that cover any fainter feature around the companion.
Fig. 1. cADI image of HIP107412, the model, and the residuals
The other 12 companions are instead orbiting far from the
central star and the speckle noise is considerably lower. We make
further distinctions between three faint companions (GJ504 B,
HD19467 B, and HR8799 b), for which the subtraction proves
eﬀective (see Figure 2), and nine bright companions (DH Tau
B, CT Cha B, Eta Tel B, HIP78530 B, HIP64892 B, AB Pic B,
TYC 8047- 232-1 B, TYC 7084-794-1 B, and HD 1160 C), for
which spurious features may appear in the residuals. Indeed, it
may happen that speckles generated around low contrast com-
panion are bright enough to be above the background. Since we
are performing post processing techniques with the cube cen-
tered on the star, speckles around oﬀ-axis PSFs are not cancelled
and may contaminate the residuals. This kind of issue does not
emerge closer to the star because the stellar speckle contami-
nants dominate there. A second and more frequent bias emerges
due to the variation of the PSF during the observation or elon-
gation of the PSF placed close to the edge of the FoV (astigma-
tism). Thus, we performed further checks, such as testing diﬀer-
ent model PSF and diﬀerent apertures.
Fig. 2. cADI image of HR8799 b, the model, and the residuals
As an example of the analysis performed to further inves-
tigate the nature of the residuals, we show in Figure 3 the re-
sults for HD1160 C and HD1160 B. In the residuals of HD1160
C (last panel of the ﬁrst row of Figure 3), a number of struc-
tures are present, such as the bright spot in the north of the im-
age (light-blue circle) and the halo close to the center (red el-
lipse). In order to obtain the second row of Figure 3, we used the
multiple_framebyframe routine on HD1160 B using as multiple
model PSF HD1160 C. The halo is still present in the residuals,
as a negative excess in this case, whereas the bright spot is can-
celed. The latter is indeed associated to an eﬀect that is, in turn,
due to low wind conditions during the observations (Milli et al.
2018), while the presence of the disk-like feature is due to an
elongation of the PSF of the C companion, which is as expected
given its large separation from the host star. In Figure 4, we also
show the contrast curves (see Section 2.2) obtained for HD1160
B when applying the multiple_framebyframe routine using the
other companion in the FoV with respect to the results obtained
Article number, page 4 of 19

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
with the single_framebyframe routine and single_fullcube with
the star used as model PSF. The contrasts achieved here are cal-
culated both with respect to the star (left y-axis) and to HD 1160
B (right y-axis).
A ﬁrst gain is obtained when considering the sin-
gle_framebyframe with respect to the single_fullcube due
to variable weather conditions during the observation. The
further gain in contrast with the multiple_framebyframe routine
is evident between 0 .05′′ and 0.1′′, where the bright spot in
Figure 3 is suppressed, whereas the subtraction is slightly worse
closer to the central peak due to the diﬀerence in shapes between
the two PSFs.
Fig. 3. Upper panel: cADI image of HD1160 C, the model and the resid-
uals; Bottom panel: cADI image of HD1160 B, using HD1160 C as
model and the processed image of the subtraction of the two.
Fig. 4. Contrast curve around HD1160 B using one single model PSF
with the single_fullcube (blue curve) and single_framebyframe (orange
curve) routines, and multiple model PSFs using HD1160 C in place of
the star for the multiple_framebyframe routine (green curve). Contrasts
are calculated with respect to the central star on the left y-axis and with
respect to HD 1160 B on the right one.
We show in Figure 5 another example of extended structure
obtained around, TYC 7084-794-1 B. These results are partic-
ularly misleading because they appear in two di ﬀerent observa-
tions, and both in H and K, as a disk-like shape as shown in
Figure 5. However, the extended features are produced by a ro-
tational smearing. This happens any time the exposure time for
singular frames is too long with respect to the rotation of the ob-
jects in the FoV . Usually, this eﬀect is very small and negligible,
with the exception of a few systems that have to be treated indi-
vidually. TYC 7084-794-1 is an example of these since it is very
close to the zenith at meridian passage from Paranal and with a
detector integration time (DITs) of only 64s, the brown dwarf,
placed at a separation of 2.99′′, changes its position by roughly
ﬁve pixels. For this reason, the PSF of the object is elongated
with respect to the PSF of the star. One possible way to over-
come this kind of e ﬀect might be to elongate the model PSF in
the same way as the PSF of the object or to use a reference PSF
in the FoV at similar separation, if any. We show in Figure 6
the sensitively improved subtraction obtained after considering
a PSF model elongated in the same direction of the BD.
Fig. 5. cADI image of TYC 7084-794-1 B, the model and the residuals
for the ﬁrst (upper panel, H band) and the second (bottom panel, K
band) epochs.
Fig. 6. cADI image of TYC 7084-794-1 B, with the model taking into
account the smearing of the PSF of the companion and the residuals for
the ﬁrst (upper panel, H band) and the second (bottom panel, K band)
epochs.
Based on the analysis performed on a few test companions,
it emerged that structures in the residuals must be treated very
carefully in order to discriminate between those that are artifacts
and those that are real. Starting from the end of 2017, one of the
greatest source of artifacts in the residuals, the low wind e ﬀect,
is almost completely ﬁxed, with a number of a ﬀected nights at
the level of∼ 3% (Milli et al. 2018).
Useful information about the observational parameters are
contained in the SPARTA ﬁles that are produced together with
the scientiﬁc data by the SPHERE Data Center. These ﬁles
provide information on how the wind velocity and the seeing
varied during the observation for each frame. Moreover, non
coronagraphics images of the star collected with the di ﬀerential
tip-tilt sensor (DTTS, see Appendix B) in the H band can be
used to test the quality of the PSF during the time sequence
Article number, page 5 of 19

<<<PAGE 6>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
(see Appendix B for a detailed description). Thanks to this
supplementary information, we can determine, with higher
conﬁdence, the nature of the residuals that we obtain.
4. DH Tau B
Among the targets we analyzed, the most convincing case is rep-
resented by a candidate companion close to DH Tau B.
4.1. The DH T au system
DH Tau is a young (age ∼ 1.4 Myr, see Table 2) low-mass star
in the Taurus star-forming region. DH Tau is still in the accret-
ing phase and forms a wide binary (15" projected separation)
with a similar star, DI Tau. A low-mass brown dwarf or massive
planet (DH Tau B) was discovered by Itoh et al. (2005). Its mass
is estimated to be close to the deuterium burning limit. DH Tau
B was shown to be accreting from prominent Hα and Paschenβ
emission (Zhou et al. 2014; Bonnefoy et al. 2014). ALMA ob-
servations by Long et al. (2019) resolved a faint and compact
disk around the central star, while no disk around DH Tau B was
detected (Wu et al. 2017; Pérez et al. 2019).
4.2. Observations
The DH Tau system was observed across multiple epochs with
SPHERE, on the dates 2015-10-26, 2015-12-19, and 2018-12-
16 within the guaranteed time of the SPHERE Consortium in
IRDIFS mode (H2H3 ﬁlters) and on the date 2020-01-05 after
the acceptance of an open time proposal (0104.C-0327(A)) in
IRDIFS_EXT mode (K1K2 ﬁlters). The SPHERE data were re-
duced as described in Section 3. We also analyzed the SPHERE
diﬀerential tip-tilt sensor (DTTS) images, which show a recon-
struction of the PSF of the star behind the coronagraph (see Ap-
pendix B). With this supplementary information, we can evaluate
whether the PSF was a ﬀected by consistent variations in atmo-
spheric conditions and, thus, if potential structures detected in
the residuals are more likely to be real features or spurious arti-
facts.
The system was also observed with LBTI using the LMIR-
Cam instrument in L’ band (λ = 3.6µm) on the date 2019-09-19.
More details about LBTI/LMIRCam and the data reduction per-
formed are given in Appendix C.
4.3. The candidate companion
The detections were initially retrieved from the ﬁrst two
SPHERE datasets listed in Table 1. The results are shown in the
top two rows of Figure 7.
To conﬁrm the detection, DH Tau was re-observed with
SPHERE with the H2H3 and K1K2 ﬁlter pairs. With regard to
the H-band observation, the candidate was detected in the resid-
ual at a similar separation and position angle with respect to the
previous observations (third row of Figure 7). In the K-band, in-
stead, the candidate is resolved only in K1 (fourth raw of Figure
7), whereas in K2, a marginal excess is detected in the residuals
even if it is not signiﬁcantly above the background.
To characterize the candidate, which we call DH Tau Bb,
we discarded the ﬁrst epoch due to poor observational condi-
tions and a strong low-wind eﬀect. In Figure B.1, we show, as an
example, the DTTS images of the PSF of the central star at dif-
ferent times during the ﬁrst and second observations taken with
Fig. 7. From the top, epoch 1 (2015-10-26), epoch 2 (2015-12-19),
epoch 3 (2018-12-16) in H2-band, and epoch 4 (2020-01-05) in K1-
band for DH Tau B as observed with SPHERE /VLT, and the observa-
tion (2019-09-19) in the L’-band obtained with LMIRCam /LBTI. The
candidate companion is visible in the right panels of the SPHERE ob-
servations. There is no detection for the LBT data.
SPHERE (see Appendix B). In the ﬁrst epoch, there are constant
variations to the shape of the PSF almost throughout the entire
observation. During the other observations (and, similarly, dur-
ing the third and fourth datasets), there are no signiﬁcant di ﬀer-
ences between the PSFs, thus strengthening the detection of the
candidate companion.
The error bars on the position and contrast of DH Tau Bb
were evaluated empirically removing a model of the secondary
companion from the raw data, and injecting fake secondary
companions at similar contrast and angular separation from the
brown dwarf. We then retrieved the contrast and position of the
injected fake companions with the tools described in Section 2,
and evaluated the mean error on the retrieval.
As mentioned above, a disk was detected around the central
star with ALMA observations (Long et al. 2019). Since the disk
was very faint in the ALMA observations and was not detected in
scattered light using our own SPHERE observations, we do not
expect it to impact the PSF subtraction. The parameters retrieved
for DH Tau Bb are listed in Table 3.
We did notice a drift in the separation of the PSF of the can-
didate from the H2 to the K1-band. This might indicate that the
candidate is not real since it changes its position roughly pro-
portionally to λ/D. On the other hand, the change in position
might be explained by a combination of other factors. First of
all, the PSF in the K-band is much broader than in the H-band
so that it is more di ﬃcult to disentangle the two objects. More-
over, we notice that the position of the candidate is coincident
Article number, page 6 of 19

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
with the position of the ﬁrst Airy ring of the central companion.
Thus, the superimposition of the ﬂux of DH Tau Bb with the ﬂux
coming from the Airy ring of the brown dwarf, which is not well-
subtracted, might cause a shift in the peak of the candidate PSF.
Additionally, the background at increasing wavelengths is more
noisy so that the signal to noise ratio is worse in the K-band than
in the H-band.
The position angle of the candidate is even more di ﬃcult to
determine with high precision since, at the separation of the can-
didate, the uncertainty of one pixel corresponds to ∼ 10◦. We
obtained diﬀerent values for each epoch and wavelength, with
a maximum variation of ∼ 15◦ between the second and third
epochs. This might be partially due to the orbital motion of DH
Tau Bb around the brown dwarf. In fact, assuming a face-on sys-
tem and a circular, coplanar orbit for the candidate around the
brown dwarf, we would obtain a period of ∼ 320yrs for a ra-
dial separation of∼ 0.08′′. In the four-year baseline, the candi-
date companion should then change its position angle by ∼ 4◦,
or more if the orbit is not circular and the DH Tau Bb is close
to periastron passage. Thus, taking into account the orbital mo-
tion, the unknown inclination of the system and the error bars
for each position angle, the values obtained are reasonably con-
sistent. Moreover, the time baseline between the epochs allows
us to rule out the (a priori extremely unlikely) possibility of a
background object projected by chance very close to DH Tau B,
considering the proper motion of the central star (µα: 7.07±0.11
;µδ: -20.70±0.08 from Gaia DR2). This would imply a shift of
about 21 mas toward west and 61 mas toward North of a sta-
tionary background source with respect to DH Tau B between
epochs 2 and 3.
The last parameter retrieved was the contrast. Adopting the
age of 1.4 Myrs, we then calculated the mass of the candidate
using the BT-SETTL models. The values obtained for the mass
of DH Tau Bb, ∼ 1 M Jup, are consistent at each epoch and in
each ﬁlter at which the candidate was detected (H2, H3 and K1).
The colors H2-H3 and H2-K1 of the candidate point towards an
early T-type, as shown in Figure 8, where we compare them with
those for a collection of other low-mass objects. (Bonnefoy et al.
2018).
In order to conﬁrm the detection and better constrain the
spectral characteristics of DH Tau Bb, we observed the system in
L’-band with the LMIRCam/LBTI instrument (see Appendix C).
The candidate was not detected in the residuals, as shown in the
last panel of Figure 7. Therefore, we determined only an upper
limit to the contrast of the object in L’,∼ 9.2 , which corresponds
to an upper limit in mass of 2.6 MJup. This is consistent with the
mass of DH Tau Bb as obtained in H and K band with SPHERE.
The non-detection in L’-band strengthens the hypothesis that the
companion, if real, is an early T-type object rather than a late L
spectral-type that would have been more common considering
the young age of the system. Indeed, from the color-magnitude
diagram, an L-type companion is expected to be brighter in the
L’-band, with a gain in∆mag∼ 1−2 with respect to the H-band.
The corresponding contrast would have been∼ 3− 6× 10−4 that
is (marginally) detectable in the observations taken with LMIR-
CAM/LBTI.
The DH Tau system has been observed with many di ﬀer-
ent instruments since its discovery (Itoh et al. 2005). Therefore,
we analyzed archive data taken with the WFC3 /Hubble Space
Telescope (HST) and with the NIRC2/Keck Telescope. For both
observations, we did not detect any signs of binarity (the results
are omitted from this paper). Indeed, we did not expect to ﬁnd
prominent features either in reﬂected light or in the poor-quality
L’ dataset available.
4.4. Discussion
The observations described in this paper suggest the presence of
a planetary-mass companion (1 M Jup) at 10 au around DH Tau
B. We consider the object as candidate rather than a conﬁrmed
companion because of the small wavelength-dependence of the
separation and the instability of the PSF a ﬀecting some of the
observations. On the other hand, the roughly consistent position
and ﬂux of the candidate in four diﬀerent datasets spanning sev-
eral years argues against an instrumental artifact and it is unique
among the targets considered in our study.
This would be the ﬁrst case of a planetary-mass companion
around a brown dwarf bound to a star. If the candidate is con-
ﬁrmed, the DH Tau system will become the ﬁrst laboratory to
test formation mechanisms for binary planet and brown dwarf
systems. While a detailed study of the possible formation sce-
narios is not warranted at this stage, we brieﬂy discuss some
possibilities below.
We may conﬁdently exclude the formation of DH Tau Bb
by core accretion in a disk surrounding the brown dwarf due to
the large masses involved and the wide separation. In order to
generate a secondary gas giant, the circumplanetary disk would
have to be unrealistically massive with respect to the mass of DH
Tau B.
Some disk instability models showed outcomes similar to
those observed here (Stamatellos & Whitworth 2009) but with
very low probability. However, more recent models of disk insta-
bility (Forgan et al. 2018) fail to reproduce the architecture ob-
served for the DH Tau system. Considering the low mass of the
central star (0.37M⊙), this mechanism does not appear as a plau-
sible explanation. Another mechanism that could explain the ex-
istence of this system conﬁguration is presented in Ochiai et al.
(2014), where the authors assess that the formation of planet-
planet pairs should be a quite e ﬃcient mechanism, with a 10%
success rate for planets that undergo orbital crossing. Therefore,
it might be possible that DH Tau B and DH Tau Bb formed in-
dependently in the circumstellar disk of DH Tau and then go
through orbital crossing and close encounters, forming a binary
system. However, the dynamical simulations by Ochiai et al.
(2014) predict that pairs of planets formed in this way shrink to a
very close separation through tidal dissipation. The wide separa-
tion observed might be explained in this framework if we man-
age to catch the high eccentric phase soon after the encounter.
The latter scenario considers the system to have formed as a
low-mass triple system through cloud fragmentation. The mass
ratio of 0.027 between DH Tau B and DH Tau and their wide
separation is consistent with this mechanism. On the other hand,
companions to brown dwarfs are typically found to have mass
ratios close to unity, both for isolated brown dwarfs in the ﬁeld
(Fontanive et al. 2018) and for the few cases of bound brown
dwarfs (see Section 1). The 0.1 mass ratio between DH Tau Bb
and DH Tau B would, then, appear quite unusual. A 1 M Jup ob-
ject is also expected to be small for cloud fragmentation, being
close or below the minimum mass for this process that is quoted
in the literature (Boyd & Whitworth 2005; Whitworth & Sta-
matellos 2006; Zuckerman & Song 2009).
The orbital crossing and cloud fragmentation scenarios, even
with the mentioned caveats, seem to be the most likely to ex-
plain this peculiar system. Once the candidate is deﬁnitively con-
ﬁrmed, dedicated simulations will be needed to investigate these
two formation channels in more depth.
An alternative interpretation is that the feature detected in
the residuals is a portion of a disk surrounding the brown dwarf.
Indeed, accretion through a disc would be consistent with the
Article number, page 7 of 19

<<<PAGE 8>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
Fig. 8. Color-magnitude diagrams for the IRDIS/SPHERE photometry for the candidate DH Tau Bb compared to a collection of objects from the
literature (Bonnefoy et al. 2018).
signiﬁcant Paschenβ emission for DH Tau B. This could explain
the shift with the wavelength since our analysis is sensitive to
grains of di ﬀerent sizes. Moreover, an extended source would
imply large uncertainties in the position angle. However, the disk
was not detected in ALMA observations and it was estimated to
be very compact around the brown dwarf (Wu et al. 2017; Pérez
et al. 2019). This would be inconsistent with our estimate of a
separation of∼ 10 au.
5. Statistics of binarity of bound companions
5.1. Detection limits
For each companion presented in Table 2, we took the ﬂux that
was derived from the observations listed in Table 1 and con-
verted it into mass accordingly with regard to the age adopted
for the system (for systems with multiple observations available,
we used the ones marked with an asterix in Table 1). We used the
BT SETTL models (Allard et al. 2003) in most cases with the
only exceptions of 51 Eri b, HD95086 b, and GJ 504 b for which
the ages and contrasts fell out of the boundaries and the AMES
COND (Baraﬀe et al. 2003) model was applied instead. We then
calculated the detection limits around 25 out of 27 companions
(we excluded HD1160 C because it falls in the stellar mass range
and PDS 70 b because its Hill radius falls inside one FWHM)
in order to investigate the contrast reached in their close neigh-
borhoods. The detection limits are obtained from a cADI image
of the cube where each companion was already subtracted, as
described in Section 2.2. The contrasts are then converted into
masses using the mean ages of the systems listed in Table 2 and
the BT-SETTL models for the most of the sample, with the ex-
ception of 51 Eri b, AB Pic B, η Tel B, GJ 504b, HD 95086
b, HIP 65426 b, TYC 7084-794-1 B, and TYC 8047-232-1 B
for which AMES-COND models were used instead since con-
trasts fell out of the range adopted by BT-SETTL conversions.
The Hill radii are then calculated adopting the mean value of the
masses in Table 2 and the detection limits are interrupted at those
separations.
We show in Figure 9 the detection limits for the close-in (up-
per panels) and wide (bottom panels) companions. Since HD
1160 B is the only close-in companion with a large Hill ra-
dius compared to the other planets and brown dwarfs placed
within 1”, we moved it from the ﬁrst to the second group so that
shorter contrast curves are better visualized. From these curves,
it emerges how our detection possibilities are limited in the in-
ner part of the system due to the contamination of the star and
smaller Hill radii whereas, far from the center, the region of in-
ﬂuence around directly imaged companions is background lim-
ited and much wider.
5.2. Statistical results
We constrain the binary frequency of bound companions using
the statistical code described in Fontanive et al. (2018). This
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling tool was built
using the emcee (Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013) python algo-
rithm, enabling the derivation of statistical constraints on stellar
or substellar populations (occurrence rates, distributions of com-
panions in the parameter space) based on observed surveys (e.g.,
Fontanive et al. 2018, 2019).
Binary companions bound to stars have not been studied in
depth to date, neither observationally nor theoretically. As a re-
sult, the shapes of the companion distributions in mass and sepa-
ration for such binary systems currently lack any empirical con-
straints or theoretical predictions. We thus need to rely on as-
sumptions for the underlying population distributions in order
to constrain the binary frequency of these bound companions.
Given the relatively low masses of our probed planets and brown
dwarfs in comparison to isolated, old brown dwarfs in the ﬁeld,
we adopt the mass ratio and separation distributions derived in
Fontanive et al. (2018) for late-type T5−Y0 objects in the Solar
neighbourhood. This includes a lognormal distribution in sep-
Article number, page 8 of 19

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
Fig. 9. Detection limits for companions placed within 1” separation from the host star (upper panels) and beyond 1” (lower panels, HD 1160 B
was moved to the second group for a better visualization of the results). Figures on the left show contrasts with respect to the central star as a
function of separation (in arcsec); on the right, we show detection limits expressed in mass as a function of separation (in au).
aration with a peak at 2.9 au and a logarithmic width of 0.21,
and a power law distribution with index 6.1 in mass ratio (see
Fontanive et al. 2018 for details).
From the calculated detection limits around each target and
assuming that those same distributions hold for our surveyed
systems, we constrain the binary rate of bound substellar com-
panions between separations of 0.5−100 au and mass ratios of
q = 0.05− 1. Figure 10 shows the obtained posterior distribu-
tions from the MCMC analyses performed for respective cases
of 0 and 1 detection. As expected, the scenario with no detected
companion only provides an upper limit on the binary frequency,
of f < 8.1% (< 21.2%) at the 1- σ (2-σ) level. In the case
where our reported candidate DH Tau Bb is real, we derive a
binary fraction of f = 7.3+8.9
−5.6% on those mass ratio and sepa-
ration ranges, which is in good agreement with the results for
ﬁeld brown dwarfs from Fontanive et al. (2018) on a comparable
region of the parameter space.
We emphasize that the obtained frequencies assume a ﬁxed
distribution of companions in the separation-mass ratio space
and that these results only hold under those assumptions. While
it would be very interesting to explore other possible underly-
ing shapes of companion distributions that may di ﬀer from the
ﬁeld brown dwarfs, the existing data do not currently allow for
such an analysis. It is worth noting, however, that the one detec-
tion present in our observed sample (if conﬁrmed) has a fairly
wide separation (∼10 au) and a very low mass ratio ( q < 0.1)
compared to the peaks of the adopted ﬁeld distributions (∼3 au,
q∼ 1). Late-type ﬁeld binaries indeed rarely have separations
larger than around 10 au, and typically show strong preferences
for near-equal-mass systems. The disparity between the model
and observed populations is further highlighted by the fact that
low q values like that of the DH Tau B system are only reached
around few targets in the SPHERE sample. This suggests that
the true binary companion distributions for bound planets and
brown dwarfs are likely to be somewhat di ﬀerent than for the
ﬁeld population, although deeper observations of larger sample
sizes will be required to conﬁrm this and to further explore for-
mation theories for bound and isolated systems.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we present tools based on the NEGFC technique to
suppress the ﬂux of known faint planets and brown dwarfs in or-
der to detect potential companions or disks around them. The dif-
ferent routines are optimized in order to determine, with the best
possible precision, the position and the ﬂux of the companion, to
subtract it, and to look into the residuals for additional faint fea-
tures bound to it. We distinguished among two kinds of routine:
the single_fullcube and the single_framebyframe routines, which
use a single model PSF, and the multiple_framebyframe routine,
Article number, page 9 of 19

<<<PAGE 10>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
Fig. 10. Posterior distributions obtained for the frequency of bound bi-
nary companions from the MCMC analysis, in cases of 0 (blue) and 1
(red) detection in our survey. Frequencies were derived over separation
ranges of 0.5−100 au and mass ratios of q = 0.05− 1. The red dashed
line shows the peak of the posterior density in the 1-detection scenario,
at 7.3%, while only an upper limit was obtained in the 0-detection case.
The shaded areas correspond to the 68% conﬁdence intervals.
which uses more PSFs as models to subtract the companion. The
single-model PSF tools are usually used for coronagraphic ob-
servations, whereas if a suitable PSF is visible in each raw frame
the multiple-PSFs routine can be applied (both in coronagraphic
and non-coronagraphic datasets). The latter tool is very helpful
to suppress spurious features that may appear in the residuals
due to the variation of the PSF during the observation. However,
PSFs that are bright enough and at a good-enough separation to
be used as models are rarely found in the FoV of substellar com-
panions. In non-coronagraphic observations, instead, the central
star can be used as a model for each frame but such settings are
not common for planets hunting due to the poor contrast that can
be achieved.
These tools were ﬁrst tested on synthetic point sources and
disks and on selected on-sky test cubes. We then applied it to the
substellar companions imaged by SPHERE within the SHINE
survey. This is the ﬁrst methodical study that aims to look for
circumplanetary disks and satellites or, more speciﬁcally, for the
kind of instrument that we have, that is, pairs of bound planets.
Among the objects in the sample, we identiﬁed a candidate com-
panion around DH Tau B, with a projected separation of∼ 10 au
from the brown dwarf and with mass a of∼ 1 MJup. The DH Tau
system was observed with SPHERE (H2-H3 and K1-K2 bands)
in four di ﬀerent epochs and with LMIRCam /LBTI (L’ band).
The candidate was detected in each of the H-band datasets and
in the K1-band. The K2 and L’-band observations did not lead to
a detection but they were used to obtain only the upper limits on
the mass of the candidate, which is consistent with the previous
results. The color-magnitude diagrams point towards an early T-
type object.
We derived the contrast curves for each of the 25 suitable
substellar companions observed with SPHERE and we com-
pared the statistics of the multiplicity of our bound companions
to the one published in Fontanive et al. (2018) for isolated ob-
jects. If the companion around DH Tau B is real, the frequency
of binary substellar companion is ∼ 7.3%, which is consistent
with the result obtained for ﬁeld brown dwarfs.
The techniques presented in this paper will serve as a useful
tool for the hunt of companions and extended sources around
directly imaged companions in the future. Indeed, in the long-
term, we plan to adapt the tools described here to prepare for the
next-generation telescopes, such as JWST and ELT.
MIRI@JWST will provide high-contrast imaging and IFS
imaging from 5.6 to 28.8 µm. The greatest advantage of this
telescope is the stability of the PSF over time. For MIRI, the ex-
pected contrast goes from 10−4 to 10−6 at separations> 2 arcsec
(Danielski et al. 2018). Even if the contrast were lower than what
is achievable with SPHERE, it will be more e ﬃcient for colder
and smaller objects due to the longer wavelength coverage.
A dedicated high-contrast imager on an ELT (e.g., Kasper
et al. 2011) is expected to reach contrasts of 10 −8 at 30 mas to
10−9 at larger separations. These contrasts will allow for the de-
tection of Earth-like planets. With this instrument, which will
also provide a very stable PSF over time, exomoons and exor-
ings will be much more e ﬃciently detected. These detections
will increase the probability of ﬁnding habitable zones even at
far distances from the host star, much the same way as the moons
of our Solar System are best candidates for the research of life
forms.
Acknowledgements. SPHERE is an instrument designed and built by a con-
sortium consisting of IPAG (Grenoble, France), MPIA (Heidelberg, Germany),
LAM (Marseille, France), LESIA (Paris, France), Laboratoire Lagrange (Nice,
France), INAF–Osservatorio di Padova (Italy), Observatoire de Geneve (Switzer-
land), ETH Zurich (Switzerland), NOV A (Netherlands), ONERA (France) and
ASTRON (Netherlands) in collaboration with ESO. SPHERE was funded by
ESO, with additional contributions from CNRS (France), MPIA (Germany),
INAF (Italy), FINES (Switzerland) and NOV A (Netherlands). SPHERE also re-
ceived funding from the European Commission Sixth and Seventh Framework
Programmes as part of the Optical Infrared Coordination Network for Astronomy
(OPTICON) under grant number RII3-Ct-2004-001566 for FP6 (2004–2008),
grant number 226604 for FP7 (2009–2012) and grant number 312430 for FP7
(2013–2016). This work has made use of the SPHERE Data Centre, jointly
operated by OSUG /IPAG (Grenoble), PYTHEAS /LAM/CESAM (Marseille),
OCA/Lagrange (Nice) and Observatoire de Paris /LESIA (Paris). We thank P.
Delorme and E. Lagadec (SPHERE Data Centre) for their e ﬃcient help during
the data reduction process. This work is based on observations collected at LBT
Observatory. The LBT is an international collaboration among institutions in the
United States, Italy and Germany. LBT Corporation partners are: The Univer-
sity of Arizona on behalf of the Arizona university system; Istituto Nazionale
di Astroﬁsica, Italy; LBT Beteiligungsgesellschaft, Germany, representing the
Max-Planck Society, the Astrophysical Institute Potsdam, and Heidelberg Uni-
versity; The Ohio State University, and The Research Corporation, on behalf of
The University of Notre Dame, University of Minnesota and University of Vir-
ginia. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the “Progetti Premiali” funding
scheme of the Italian Ministry of Education, University, and Research. A.Z. ac-
knowledges support from the FONDECYT Iniciación en investigación project
number 11190837. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Programme Na-
tional de Planetologie (PNP) and the Programme National de Physique Stellaire
(PNPS) of CNRS-INSU. This work has also been supported by a grant from the
French Labex OSUG2020 (Investissements d’avenir – ANR10 LABX56). The
project is supported by CNRS, by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche. This
work has been supported by the project PRIN-INAF 2016 The Cradle of Life -
GENESIS-SKA (General Conditions in Early Planetary Systems for the rise of
life with SKA). We also acknowledge the use of the Large Binocular Telescope
Interferometer (LBTI) and the support from the LBTI team. T.H. acknowledges
support from the European Research Council under the Horizon 2020 Frame-
work Program via the ERC Advanced Grant Origins 83 24 28. We also want to
thank the referee for the useful comments.
References
Alcalá, J. M., Majidi, F. Z., Desidera, S., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, L1
Alibert, Y ., Mousis, O., & Benz, W. 2005, A&A, 439, 1205
Allard, F., Guillot, T., Ludwig, H.-G., et al. 2003, in IAU Symposium, V ol. 211,
Brown Dwarfs, ed. E. Martín, 325
Amara, A. & Quanz, S. P. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 948
Article number, page 10 of 19

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
Baraﬀe, I., Chabrier, G., Barman, T. S., Allard, F., & Hauschildt, P. H. 2003,
A&A, 402, 701
Baudoz, P., Dorn, R. J., Lizon, J.-L., et al. 2010, Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 7735, The di ﬀerential
tip-tilt sensor of SPHERE, 77355B
Beuzit, J. L., Vigan, A., Mouillet, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A155
Boccaletti, A., Abe, L., Baudrand, J., et al. 2008, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 7015, Adap-
tive Optics Systems, 70151B
Bonavita, M., D’Orazi, V ., Mesa, D., et al. 2017, A&A, 608, A106
Bonnefoy, M., Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2014, A&A, 562, A127
Bonnefoy, M., Perraut, K., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2018, A&A, 618, A63
Boyd, D. F. A. & Whitworth, A. P. 2005, A&A, 430, 1059
Carbillet, M., Bendjoya, P., Abe, L., et al. 2011, Experimental Astronomy, 30,
39
Chauvin, G., Desidera, S., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2017a, in SF2A-2017: Pro-
ceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and As-
trophysics, Di
Chauvin, G., Desidera, S., Lagrange, A. M., et al. 2017b, A&A, 605, L9
Chauvin, G., Lagrange, A. M., Dumas, C., et al. 2004, A&A, 425, L29
Cheetham, A., Bonnefoy, M., Desidera, S., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A160
Cheetham, A. C., Samland, M., Brems, S. S., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A80
Christiaens, V ., Cantalloube, F., Casassus, S., et al. 2019, ApJ, 877, L33
Climent, J. B., Berger, J. P., Guirado, J. C., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1911.04736
Danielski, C., Baudino, J.-L., Lagage, P.-O., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 276
Delorme, P., Meunier, N., Albert, D., et al. 2017a, in SF2A-2017: Proceedings
of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Di
Delorme, P., Schmidt, T., Bonnefoy, M., et al. 2017b, A&A, 608, A79
Dohlen, K., Langlois, M., Saisse, M., et al. 2008, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 7014,
Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy II, 70143L
Donati, J. F., Gregory, S. G., Alencar, S. H. P., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 2948
Ertel, S., Defrère, D., Hinz, P., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 194
Ertel, S., Defrère, D., Hinz, P. M., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2003.03499
Feiden, G. A. 2016, A&A, 593, A99
Femenía, B., Rebolo, R., Pérez-Prieto, J. A., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1524
Fontanive, C., Biller, B., Bonavita, M., & Allers, K. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 2702
Fontanive, C., Rice, K., Bonavita, M., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 4967
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman, J. 2013, PASP, 125,
306
Forgan, D. H., Hall, C., Meru, F., & Rice, W. K. M. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5036
Fusco, T., Rousset, G., Sauvage, J.-F., et al. 2006, Optics Express, 14, 7515
Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, A1
Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A1
Galicher, R., Boccaletti, A., Mesa, D., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A92
Gaspar, A. & Rieke, G. 2020, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
117, 9712
Gomez Gonzalez, C. A., Wertz, O., Absil, O., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 7
Haﬀert, S. Y ., Bohn, A. J., de Boer, J., et al. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 749
Hinz, P. M., Defrère, D., Skemer, A., et al. 2016, Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 9907, Overview of
LBTI: a multipurpose facility for high spatial resolution observations, 990704
Hyodo, R., Charnoz, S., Ohtsuki, K., & Genda, H. 2017, Icarus, 282, 195
Isella, A., Benisty, M., Teague, R., et al. 2019, ApJ, 879, L25
Itoh, Y ., Hayashi, M., Tamura, M., et al. 2005, ApJ, 620, 984
Jensen-Clem, R., Mawet, D., Gomez Gonzalez, C. A., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 19
Kasper, M., Gratton, R., Verinaud, C., et al. 2011, in Second International Con-
ference on Adaptive Optics for Extremely Large Telescopes. Online at <A
href=“http://ao4elt2.lesia.obspm.fr”>http://ao4elt2.lesia.obspm.fr</A, 12
Keppler, M., Benisty, M., Müller, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, A44
King, R. R., McCaughrean, M. J., Homeier, D., et al. 2010, A&A, 510, A99
Kirkpatrick, J. D., Dahn, C. C., Monet, D. G., et al. 2001, AJ, 121, 3235
Lagrange, A. M., Boccaletti, A., Langlois, M., et al. 2019, A&A, 621, L8
Lagrange, A. M., Bonnefoy, M., Chauvin, G., et al. 2010, Science, 329, 57
Langlois, M., Vigan, A., Moutou, C., et al. 2013, in Proceedings of the Third
AO4ELT Conference, ed. S. Esposito & L. Fini, 63
Lawler, S. M., Greenstreet, S., & Gladman, B. 2015, ApJ, 802, L20
Lazzoni, C., Gratton, R., Alcalá, J. M., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, L11
Long, F., Herczeg, G. J., Harsono, D., et al. 2019, ApJ, 882, 49
Luhman, K. L., Allers, K. N., Jaﬀe, D. T., et al. 2007, ApJ, 659, 1629
MacGregor, M. A., Wilner, D. J., Czekala, I., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 17
Macintosh, B., Graham, J. R., Ingraham, P., et al. 2014, Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Science, 111, 12661
Macintosh, B., Max, C., Zuckerman, B., et al. 2001, in Astronomical Society of
the Paciﬁc Conference Series, V ol. 244, Young Stars Near Earth: Progress and
Prospects, ed. R. Jayawardhana & T. Greene, 309
Magni, G. & Coradini, A. 2004, Planet. Space Sci., 52, 343
Maire, A.-L., Langlois, M., Dohlen, K., et al. 2016, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 9908, Proc. SPIE,
990834
Maire, A. L., Rodet, L., Cantalloube, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 624, A118
Maire, A. L., Rodet, L., Lazzoni, C., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A177
Mamajek, E. E., Quillen, A. C., Pecaut, M. J., et al. 2012, AJ, 143, 72
Marois, C., Lafrenière, D., Doyon, R., Macintosh, B., & Nadeau, D. 2006a, ApJ,
641, 556
Marois, C., Lafrenière, D., Macintosh, B., & Doyon, R. 2006b, ApJ, 647, 612
Marois, C., Macintosh, B., & Véran, J.-P. 2010, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 7736, Proc. SPIE,
77361J
Mawet, D., Milli, J., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2014, ApJ, 792, 97
Mesa, D., Baudino, J. L., Charnay, B., et al. 2018, A&A, 612, A92
Mesa, D., Vigan, A., D’Orazi, V ., et al. 2016, A&A, 593, A119
Meyer, M. 2019, in AAS/Division for Extreme Solar Systems Abstracts, V ol. 51,
AAS/Division for Extreme Solar Systems Abstracts, 101.01
Milli, J., Kasper, M., Bourget, P., et al. 2018, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 10703, Proc. SPIE,
107032A
Müller, A., Keppler, M., Henning, T., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, L2
Musso Barcucci, A., Cugno, G., Launhardt, R., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A84
Nielsen, E. L., Liu, M. C., Wahhaj, Z., et al. 2012, ApJ, 750, 53
Ochiai, H., Nagasawa, M., & Ida, S. 2014, ApJ, 790, 92
Pavlov, A., Möller-Nilsson, O., Feldt, M., et al. 2008, in Proc. SPIE, V ol. 7019,
Advanced Software and Control for Astronomy II, 701939
Peretti, S., Ségransan, D., Lavie, B., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A107
Pérez, S., Marino, S., Casassus, S., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 1005
Petit, C., Sauvage, J., Fusco, T., et al. 2014, in SPIE Astronomical Telescopes +
Instrumentation, MONTREAL, Canada
Petrus, S., Bonnefoy, M., Chauvin, G., et al. 2020, A&A, 633, A124
Potter, D., Martín, E. L., Cushing, M. C., et al. 2002, ApJ, 567, L133
Santamaría-Miranda, A., Cáceres, C., Schreiber, M. R., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
475, 2994
Sauvage, J.-F., Fusco, T., Guesalaga, A., et al. 2015, in Adaptive Optics for Ex-
tremely Large Telescopes IV (AO4ELT4), E9
Seifahrt, A., Neuhäuser, R., & Hauschildt, P. H. 2007, A&A, 463, 309
Soummer, R., Pueyo, L., & Larkin, J. 2012, ApJ, 755, L28
Spalding, E. & Stone, J. 2019, Dewarp, Astrophysics Source Code Library
Stamatellos, D. & Whitworth, A. P. 2009, MNRAS, 392, 413
Stone, J. M., Skemer, A. J., Hinz, P. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 286
Teachey, A. & Kipping, D. M. 2018, Science Advances, 4, eaav1784
Vigan, A., Moutou, C., Langlois, M., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 407, 71
Wagner, K., Follete, K. B., Close, L. M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 863, L8
Ward, W. R. & Canup, R. M. 2010, AJ, 140, 1168
Whitworth, A. P. & Stamatellos, D. 2006, A&A, 458, 817
Wolﬀ, S. G., Ménard, F., Caceres, C., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 26
Wu, Y .-L., Close, L. M., Eisner, J. A., & Sheehan, P. D. 2017, AJ, 154, 234
Wyatt, M. C. & Jackson, A. P. 2016, Space Sci. Rev., 205, 231
Zhou, Y ., Herczeg, G. J., Kraus, A. L., Metchev, S., & Cruz, K. L. 2014, ApJ,
783, L17
Zuckerman, B. & Song, I. 2009, A&A, 493, 1149
Article number, page 11 of 19

<<<PAGE 12>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
1 INAF – Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo
dell’Osservatorio 5, I-35122, Padova, Italy
2 Dipartimento di Fisica a Astronomia "G. Galilei", Universita’ di
Padova, Via Marzolo, 8, 35121 Padova, Italy
3 Núcleo de Astronomía, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universi-
dad Diego Portales, Av. Ejercito 441, Santiago, Chile
4 Escuela de Ingeniería Industrial, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias,
Universidad Diego Portales, Av. Ejercito 441, Santiago, Chile
5 Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LAM, Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de
Marseille, Marseille, France
6 Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, 3012 Bern,
Switzerland
7 Institute for Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, Royal Obser-
vatory, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh, EH9 3HJ, U.K.
8 Large Binocular Telescope Observatory, 933 North Cherry Avenue,
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
9 Steward Observatory, Department of Astronomy, University of Ari-
zona, 993 N. Cherry Ave, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA
10 LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research University, CNRS,
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ. Paris 06, Univ. Paris Diderot,
Sorbonne Paris Cité
11 Université Grenoble Alpes, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France
12 Department of Astronomy, University of Chile, Casilla 36-D, Santi-
ago, Chile
13 Max-Planck Institute for Astronomy, Königstuhl 17, 69117 Heidel-
berg, Germany
14 STAR Institute, Université de Liège, Allée du Six Août 19c, 4000,
Liège, Belgium
15 Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, 1085 S. Univer-
sity, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
16 Institute for Astronomy, ETH Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli Strasse 27,
8093 Zurich, Switzerland
17 Observatoire Astronomique de l’Université de Genève, Chemin des
Maillettes 51, 1290 Sauverny, Switzerland
18 Center for Astronomical Adaptive Optics, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721
19 CRAL, UMR 5574, CNRS, Université Lyon 1, 9 avenue Charles
André, 69561 Saint Genis Laval Cedex, France
20 Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
21 Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, AlbaNova Uni-
versity Center, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
22 European Southern Observatory, Karl Schwarzschild St, 2, 85748
Garching, Germany
Article number, page 12 of 19

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
Table 1. Observing log. The asterisks indicate the datasets used to derive the ﬂux of the companions and the contrast curves when multiple
observations were available for a single system.
Name Obs Date Observing Mode Tot rotation angle Seeing Reference
51 Eri 2017-09-27 IRDIFS_EXT 46 .4◦ 0.49′′ a
AB Pic 2015-02-06 IRDIFS 28 .3◦ 1.10′′ b
β Pic 2015-02-05 IRDIFS 76 .6◦ 0.77′′ c
CT Cha 2017-03-19 IRDIFS 25 .0◦ 0.77′′ d
DH Tau 2015-10-26 IRDIFS 20 .0◦ 1.27′′
*2015-12-19 IRDIFS 24 .5◦ 0.63′′
2018-12-16 IRDIFS 33 .7◦ 0.48′′
2019-09-19 LMIRCam 37 .0◦ 0.65′′
2020-01-05 IRDIFS_EXT 17 .4◦ 0.55′′
η Tel 2015-05-04 IRDIFS 41 .5◦ 1.11′′ b
GJ 504 *2015-06-03 IRDIFS 28 .9◦ 1.46′′ e
2016-03-29 IRDIFS 27 .5◦ 0.98′′ e
GQ Lup 2015-05-04 IRDIFS 25 .1◦ 1.05′′
*2016-06-26 IRDIFS 90 .9◦ 0.61′′
HD1160 2015-07-01 IRDIFS 30 .8◦ 0.53′′
HD4747 2016-12-11 IRDIFS_EXT 7 .1◦ 2.11′′ f
HD19467 2017-11-03 IRDIFS_EXT 63 .3◦ 0.52′′ g
HD95086 2018-01-05 IRDIFS_EXT 41 .0◦ 0.30′′
HIP64892 2016-04-01 IRDIFS 44 .7◦ 0.83′′ h
*2017-02-08 IRDIFS_EXT 54 .8◦ 0.80′′ h
HIP65426 2016-06-26 IRDIFS 42 .2◦ 0.73′′ i
*2017-02-06 IRDIFS 44 .3◦ 0.60′′ i
2018-05-12 IRDIFS_EXT 31 .6◦ 0.81′′ j
HIP78530 2015-05-04 IRDIFS 36 .3◦ 0.66′′ b
HIP107412 2016-09-16 IRDIFS_EXT 75 .9◦ 0.68′′ k
HR2562 *2017-02-06 BROAD BAND H 34 .9◦ 0.54′′ l
2017-09-28 IRDIFS_EXT 27 .6◦ 0.78′′ m
HR3549 2015-12-19 IRDIFS 32 .5◦ 0.91′′ n
HR8799 2015-07-04 IRDIFS_EXT 19 .1◦ 1.05” o
PDS 70 2018-02-04 IRDIFS_EXT 95 .7◦ 0.41′′ p
PZ Tel *2015-05-06 IRDIFS 11 .4◦ 1.24′′ b
2015-05-31 IRDIFS 9 .3◦ 1.30′′ b
TYC 7084-794-1 2015-11-29 IRDIFS 38 .9◦ 1.01′′ b
*2016-01-19 IRDIFS_EXT 70 .6◦ 1.17′′ b
TYC 8047- 232-1 *2015-09-25 IRDIFS 81 .5◦ 0.99′′ b
2016-01-17 IRDIFS 14 .3◦ 1.58′′ b
HIP87836 2018-05-09 IRDIFS 50 .4◦
Notes. References: a Maire et al. (2019); b Langlois et al. in prep; c Lagrange et al. (2019); d Schmidt et al. in
prep; e Bonnefoy et al. (2018); f Peretti et al. (2019); g Maire et al. in prep; h Cheetham et al. (2018); i Chauvin
et al. (2017b); j Cheetham et al. (2019); k Delorme et al. (2017b); l Mesa et al. (2018); m (Maire et al. 2018); n
Mesa et al. (2016); o Zurlo et al. in prep; p Müller et al. (2018)
Article number, page 13 of 19

<<<PAGE 14>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
Table 2. Projected distance and contrast values were obtained from the observations presented in the previous Table (Maire et al. 2016) (for
systems with multiple observations, parameters were derived from datasets with asterisks); masses were obtained using BT SETTL models and
for 51 Eri b and HD 95086 b, the AMES COND models; distances were taken from the GAIA catalogue (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016, 2018);
references for the ages are listed in the notes.
Name Separation Contrast Age Mass Distance Hill Radius Age References
(Myrs) ( M jup) (pc) (au)
51 Eri b 0 .45′′ 5.8× 10−6 24± 5 3 .4+0.4
−1.4 29.8 1.2 a
AB Pic B 5 .40′′ 6.4× 10−4 45+5
−10 14.0+0.3
−0.4 50.1 40.8 b
β Pic b 0 .33′′ 1.0× 10−4 24± 5 11 .8+0.7
−0.6 19.7 1.1 a
CT Cha B 2 .68′′ 1.7× 10−3 1.41+0.38
−0.30 15+2
−1 191.8 78.5 c
DH Tau B 2 .35′′ 4.1× 10−3 1.4± 0.1 10 .6+0.4
−0.3 135.3 66.4 c
η Tel B 4 .21′′ 1.5× 10−3 24± 5 47 +5
−6 47.4 34.4 a
GJ504 B 2 .49′′ 1.3× 10−6 4000± 1800 25 +5
−7 17.5 7.6 d
GQ Lup B 0 .70′′ 3.1× 10−3 2-5 27 .6+0.8
−2.6 151.8 24.7 e
HD1160 B 0 .78′′ 8.9× 10−4 50+50
−40 58+23
−38 125.9 42.8 f
HD1160 C 5 .15′′ 4.4× 10−3 50+50
−40 175+68
−100 125.9 409.9 f
HD4747 B 0 .59′′ 6.5× 10−4 2300± 1400 72 +3
−16 18.8 1.0 g
HD19467 B 1 .63′′ 2.4× 10−5 8000+2000
−1000 70.3+0.9
−3.7 32.0 14.9 h
HD95086 b 0 .62′′ 9.1× 10−6 26+24
−14 4+2
−2 86.4 3.9 i
HIP64892B 1 .27′′ 1.3× 10−3 16+15
−7 41+23
−17 125.2 28.2 j
HIP65426 b 0 .83′′ 3.4× 10−5 14± 4 7 .1+0.4
−0.3 109.2 12.1 k
HIP78530 B 4 .18′′ 7.1× 10−4 11+12
−4 20+18
−1 137.3 113.1 l
HIP107412 B 0 .27′′ 1.2× 10−4 50-700 31 +11
−21 40.8 2.2 m
HR2562 B 0 .64′′ 2.3× 10−5 200-750 26 +7
−2 34.0 4.3 n
HR3549 B 0 .85′′ 2.1× 10−4 100-150 48 +3
−5 95.4 15.2 o
HR8799 b 1 .72′′ 2.8× 10−5 42+8
−7 6.77+0.74
−0.03 41.3 7.1 p
HR8799 c 0 .95′′ 6.9× 10−5 42+8
−7 9.3+0.3
−0.1 41.3 4.9 p
HR8799 d 0 .66′′ 7.2× 10−5 42+8
−7 9+0.2
−0.2 41.3 2.6 p
HR8799 e 0 .39′′ 7.6× 10−5 42+8
−7 9.6+0.2
−0.2 41.3 1.8 p
PDS 70 b 0 .19′′ 5.5× 10−4 5.4± 1.0 5 .6+0.6
−0.4 113.4 2.9 q
PZ Tel B 0 .50′′ 3.0× 10−3 24± 5 30 +6
−10 47.1 1.4 a
TYC 7084-794-1 B 2 .99′′ 4.0× 10−3 140± 40 32 +5
−4 22.4 19.8 r
TYC 8047-232-1 B 3 .21′′ 8.0× 10−4 42+8
−7 13.8+0.4
−0.3 86.3 47.0 p
Notes. a β Pic Moving Group; b Carina Moving Group; c Feiden (2016); d Bonnefoy et al. (2018); e Donati et al. (2012); f Nielsen
et al. (2012); g Peretti et al. (2019); h Maire et al. in prep.; i Desidera et al. in prep.; j Cheetham et al. (2018); k Chauvin et al. (2017b);
l Upper ScoCen Moving Group; m Delorme et al. (2017b); n Mesa et al. (2018); o Mesa et al. (2016); p Columba Moving Group; q
Keppler et al. (2018); r AB Doradus Moving Group.
Table 3. Parameters for the candidate DH Tau Bb
Instrument Epoch Band Contrast Mass Separation Pos Angle
(M jup) (”) ( ◦)
SPHERE 2015-12-19 H2 10.82 ± 0.18 0.99 ±0.02 0.077 ± 0.004 4.5 ± 3.5
2015-12-19 H3 10.78 ± 0.17 1.03 ±0.02 0.082 ± 0.005 4.3 ±5.2
2018-12-16 H2 10.85 ± 0.11 0.98 ±0.01 0.078 ± 0.007 -10.5 ± 3.4
2018-12-16 H3 11.00 ± 0.14 1.00 ±0.01 0.086 ± 0.005 -7.9 ± 4.2
2020-01-05 K1 11.37 ± 0.21 1.01 ±0.03 0.100 ± 0.003 -4.2 ±2.4
2020-01-05 K2 ≥10.4 ≤1.64
LBT 2019-09-19 L’ >9.2 <2.6
Article number, page 14 of 19

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
Appendix A: Data analysis
Appendix A.1: Synthetic companions
In order to understand how much we can gain from the sub-
traction of the companion in term of detection limits and which
kind of point sources we may expect to detect, we simulated a
companion (C1) in the FoV of TYC 8047-232-1, observed with
SPHERE in date 2015-09-25 (see Table 1). This C1 was injected
at a separation of r = 3.9′′ and with contrast of 10−3 with respect
to the central star.
To obtain more realistic residuals, we used two di ﬀerent
PSFs, one for the injection of the fake companion and one
as a model. At this stage, the di ﬀerences between the sin-
gle_framebyframe and single_fullcube routine are not apprecia-
ble since the injected PSF does not vary. The detection lim-
its around C1 are calculated on a cADI image obtained be-
fore and after the subtraction of the companion using sin-
gle_framebyframe routines and following the procedure de-
scribed in Section 2.
Residuals and contrast curves centered on C1 are shown in
Figure A.1. The gain in contrast when we get very close to the
PSF of the companion appears once the latter is subtracted. This
region is also the most interesting to investigate when looking
for bound features since, in most cases, it is inside the Hill radii
of substellar companions.
Fig. A.1. Upper panel: cADI images of, from the left, the companion,
the model PSF, and residuals. Bottom panel: Contrast curves centered
on the position of the companion as obtained in the post-processed
frame with (blue curve) and without (orange curve) the companion.
Contrasts are calculated with respect to the star (left y-axis) and with
respect to the companion (right y-axis).
In order to simulate two bound substellar objects, we injected
very close to C1 a second fake companion (C2) with increasing
separations and with contrasts corresponding to the values at de-
tection limits as shown on the contrast curves in Figure A.1. The
residuals for three di ﬀerent positions are shown in Figure A.2.
In the upper row, the second companion is placed at ∼ 0.05′′
from the main peak with a contrast of 5 × 10−5, in the mid row
at∼ 0.075′′ and with contrast of 4 × 10−5 and in the bottom
panel at∼ 0.1′′ with contrast of 2 × 10−5. From these prelim-
inary tests, it emerges that our procedure is, in principle, quite
eﬃcient in unveiling additional companions placed very close to
the PSF of directly imaged planets and brown dwarfs. However,
artifacts that are present in the residuals, especially at few λ/D,
may hide or simulate the presence of faint objects. In the upper
raw, for example, the fake companion is detected in the residuals
even if it could be interpreted as an additional artifact attributed
to the PSF subtraction. For such a scenario, more datasets would
be needed. Once, instead we move farther from the central peak,
the PSF of the secondary is more evidently disentangled by the
surrounding residuals.
Fig. A.2. Injection of a second fake companion at the detection limits
placed at 0.05′′ (upper panel), 0.075′′ (mid panel), and 0 .1′′ (bottom
panel) from the peak of the primary.
Appendix A.2: Synthetic disks
Since the method described in this paper is optimized to sub-
tract the best point-like model to a given PSF, any conspicuous
deviation from such a proﬁle should be visible in the residuals
whenever it is above the background noise. For this reason, we
should be able not only to detect point-like sources but also ex-
tended ones. In order to understand which kind of residuals we
should expect from extended sources, we inject a circular an-
nulus around the mock planet C1 (see previous Section) with
diﬀerent inclinations.
Therefore, each raw frame was initially de-rotated into its
real position, a one pixel-width annulus with uniform con-
trast was inclined and injected around the companion. For the
forward-modelling process, the planet +annulus were then con-
volved with the PSF of the instrument. Finally, the frame was
rotated again in the original conﬁguration. We must stress that
such models are only qualitative and not representative of the
physical processes involved (see discussion below). However,
more accurate simulations of disks around substellar compan-
ions are beyond the purposes of this paper.
We then applied thesingle_framebyframe routine to the cube
with C1 and the synthetic disk. We show in Figure A.3 the re-
sults obtained. The circular annulus was injected at a separation
of∼ 35mas, with an integrated ﬂux ratio with respect to the
Article number, page 15 of 19

<<<PAGE 16>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
Fig. A.3. Example of a companion with a synthetic disk with inclina-
tion, from top to bottom, of 0◦, 45◦, 85◦
companion of Fdisk/F pl = 1/10. Moreover, we simulated an in-
clination of the disk moving from a face-on system (upper row),
through 45◦ of inclination (mid row), to an nearly edge-on con-
ﬁguration (85◦, bottom row). From Figure A.3 it emerges how
much the inclination inﬂuences the detectability of extended fea-
tures even in an ideal case like this.
Other factors should be taken into account with regard to the
detectability of extended features. Apart from the inclinations
that, as shown before, form a critical aspect, also the brightness
of the disk and its extension are crucial parameters. In particu-
lar, disks around sub-stellar companions are less massive than
circumstellar ones. However, their brightness may not be pro-
portional to the quantity of dust grains since they are illuminated
both from the inside, by the companion, and from the outside,
by the star. Even if disks around planets and brown dwarfs may
have higher contrast than expected, we still may not be able to
detect them due to the small Hill radii involved. Such compact
disks are not resolved and may only be detected by their emis-
sion lines.
Appendix A.3: HIP 87836 data
We also tested the routines described in Section 2 on an ad hoc
dataset, HIP 87836. This system is particularly suitable for our
purposes since it is placed almost on the galactic plane (Galactic
coordinates 001.9927977373370 -01.6464052166128); thus the
FoV of the instrument is very crowded with PSFs, as shown in
Figure A.4. Due to the projection on the sky plane, a few of
these stars are detected very close to each other so that they may
resemble multiple bound systems, similar to the ones that we are
investigating.
The dataset we analyzed comes from observations taken with
SPHERE/VLT in May 2018 with the coronagraph on (see Sec-
tion 3 for the description of the observations and their pre-
processing). To test the e ﬃciency of our routines in detecting
further companions to directly imaged sources, we chose two ap-
parent multiple systems with di ﬀerent ﬂux ratios and distances
between the primary and the secondary that are highlighted by
blue circles in Figure A.4.
Fig. A.4. cADI image of HIP 87836. Encircled in blue, the two stars
used for the analysis are described in Appendix A.3
The ﬁrst point source (P1) is placed at rP1 = 4.11′′ and
θP1 = 209.1◦ and it is very bright, exhibiting a contrast with
respect to the central star F1 = 2.5× 10−4. A second fainter ob-
ject is placed nearby P1. Our aim is to visualize it in the residuals
and, subsequently, to determine its precise position and ﬂux. In
order to do that, we ran the single_framebyframe routine to op-
timize the position and contrast of P1 and, then, to subtract it to
obtain the ﬁnal image shown in the upper panel of Figure A.5. As
expected, the secondary is clearly visible in the upper right cor-
ner of the residuals. Moreover, another companion, very close to
the primary and not visible by eye in the original image, was un-
veiled after the subtraction. In order to determine contrasts and
positions for the secondary (S1) and the tertiary (T1) we applied
twice our routines to subtract each object, in turn. Since S1 and
T1 are too faint to optimize ( r,θ, F) in each of the unprocessed
frames of the scientiﬁc cube, we used the single_fullcube rou-
tine. Results of the two subtractions are shown in the second
and third rows of Figure A.5, respectively. The contrast with re-
spect to the primary are very similar, F2/F1 = 1.7× 10−2 and
F3/F1 = 1.8× 10−2, and the spots are placed at rS 1 = 0.13′′,
θS 1 = 305.8◦ , and rT1 = 0.09′′,θT1 = 72.8◦ with respect to P1.
The second point source (P2) is placed at rP2 = 4.07′′ and
θP2 = 267.1◦ and is much fainter than P1, with a contrast of
F1 = 1.4× 10−5. The secondary (S2) is not clearly distinguish-
able from the primary. Thus, this system is a perfect test bench
for our routines with regard to fainter objects with close com-
panions. We ran the single_framebyframe routine to optimize
(r,θ, F) for P2 and to subsequently subtract it, as shown in the
upper row of Figure A.6. In the image of the residuals, S2 is
clearly visible and, similarly to what we have done for S1 and
T1, we ran the single_fullcube routine to determine position and
ﬂux for this object. Results of the second subtraction are shown
in the bottom panel of Figure A.6. The contrast obtained with re-
spect to the primary is F2/F1 = 2.1× 10−1 and the spot is placed
at rS 2 = 0.07′′,θS 2 = 99.3◦ with respect to P2. Together with the
images of the two point sources, we show in Figure A.6 the con-
trast curves centered on the position of P2 before (blue curve)
Article number, page 16 of 19

<<<PAGE 17>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
Fig. A.5. Images of the object P1 around HIP 87836, model and resid-
uals of, from the top, the primary P1, the secondary S1, and the tertiary
T1.
and after (orange curve) subtracting P2. Such values were ob-
tained subtracting S2 from each raw frame and, then, using the
same procedure described in Section 2. The red dot in the plot
represents the position and contrast obtained for S2.
Unfortunately, we were not able to ﬁnd any background star
that could be used as a model for each frame. Indeed, the only
two bright point sources are placed at the very edge of the FoV
so that anisoplanatism aﬀects such PSFs. We tested both objects
as model PSFs for the multiple_framebyframe routine but the
residuals are higher than the ones obtained with the PSF of the
star.
Appendix B: DTTS data
The diﬀerential tip-tilt sensor of SPHERE is a second-stage tip-
tilt sensor located just before the near-infrared coronagraphic
wheel (Beuzit et al. 2019). At this location, a grey beam splitter
separates a few percent of the light, which is sent to a technical
camera sensing precisely the position of the focal spot at a rate
of 1 Hz. This enables the compensation of any slow movement
between the coronagraph focus and the visible wave-front sen-
sor due to thermal movements, residual di ﬀerential dispersion,
etc. The di ﬀerential tip-tilt loop of the AO system ensures the
ﬁnal and accurate centering of the star on the coronagraph. Its
precision has been assessed in the integration phase and on-sky
to be< 0.5 mas, (Baudoz et al. 2010) which means 1/80th of the
diﬀraction width in H-band, for bright stars. For stars as faint in
the H-band as DH Tau, the accuracy is probably reduced.
During the observations, the DTTS images are regularly
recorded as part of the AO system telemetry. The system records
a 32×32-pixel, 1-sec average image every 30 seconds. This se-
ries of images enables monitoring di ﬀerent information: ﬂux
variation, residual jitter of the PSF, inﬂuence of the low-wind
eﬀect on the PSF (Sauvage et al. 2015; Milli et al. 2018). It is,
however, important to note that for faint stars, only the tip of the
PSF will be visible in the DTTS images due to the faintness of
the star combined with the small fraction of the ﬂux that is taken
for the tip-tilt sensing. Therefore, mild low-wind eﬀect may not
necessarily be detected using the DTTS images.
Fig. A.6. Contrast curve (upper ﬁgure) with and without the P2 point
source (S2 was removed before calculating the contrasts and is repre-
sented by the red dot) and images of the object P2 (lower ﬁgures) around
HIP 87836, model and residuals of, from the top, the primary P2, and
the secondary S2.
We show in Figure B.1 the DTTS images retrieved for DH
Tau for the four epochs obtained with SPHERE. While in the
ﬁrst epoch large PSF variations and signiﬁcant low-wind e ﬀect
can be seen, in the second epoch, the PSF as resulting from the
DTTS images is remarkably stable along the full sequence of
observations.
Appendix C: LBT data reduction
The observations at the LBT were taken on the 2019-09-19 with
the L- and M-band InfraRed Camera (LMIRCam) behind the
cryogrenically cooled beam combiner of the Large Binocular
Telescope Interferometer (LBTI, Hinz et al. 2016). The LBTI’s
primary purpose is to perform nulling interferometry (Ertel et al.
2018, 2020), but the instrument also provides the possibility to
obtain among other modes sensitive, high-contrast adaptive op-
tics imaging observations using one of the LBT apertures or both
independently (e.g., Stone et al. 2018). Here, we used the latter
mode.
The observations were taken without a coronagraph so that
we could apply the multiple_framebyframe routines using the
PSFs of the star as model. For this purpose, short (0.3 s, unsatu-
rated frames) and long (0.9 s, saturated frames) exposure times
were alternated during the 2h40min time of the observation, with
a stable seeing of∼ 0.65′′ and a FoV rotation angle of∼ 37◦. A
total of 6620 frames were acquired, with 40 unsaturated frames
every 400 saturated ones. The images of the star from the two
apertures of the LBT were placed next to each other on the de-
Article number, page 17 of 19

<<<PAGE 18>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. language_editing_binarity
Fig. B.1. Reconstruction of the PSF of the central star during the observations for the ﬁrst (left) and second (right) epochs.
tector at a distance suﬃcient not to inﬂuence the discovery space
around the DH Tau system as seen by the left and right mirrors.
Nodding in the down-up direction on the detector (NOD-A and
NOD-B position, respectively) was done to subtract the variable
sky and telescope background and detector artifacts. During each
sequence of 40 unsaturated or 400 saturated frames, the star was
placed in the NOD-A position for the ﬁrst half of the frames
and in the NOD-B position for the second half. Due to the pres-
ence of clouds and internal errors, a total of 460 frames were
discarded before starting the reduction.
These frames are 2048× 2048 pixels, joining the images of
the star, either in NOD-A or NOD-B position, gathered from
the right and left mirrors. Each frame was actually composed of
two images, the ﬁrst of which with a minimum integration time
of 27ms, so that it could be used as a quasi-instantaneous bias.
Thus, as a ﬁrst step of the data reduction, we subtracted the two
frames to remove bias drifts at frequencies higher than the nod-
ding frequency. Then, we subtracted to each frame in one NOD
position the mean of the closest sequence taken in the opposite
NOD. For example, considering the sequence of frames from 1
to 400, we subtracted to each frame in NOD-A (from 1 to 200)
the mean of the frames in NOD-B (from 201 to 400). This pro-
cedure removes all the remaining bias, the majority of detector
artifacts, and the sky- and telescope background.
The LMIRCam observations are strongly aﬀected by distor-
tion eﬀects, depending on the position of the star in the FoV . We
then applied a distortion correction provided by the LBTI team
(Spalding & Stone 2019) and available on the LBTO webpage1.
We divided the frames into four datasets, one for each mirror
(left or right) and NOD position, recentering the images on the
position of the star and, subsequently, cropping them to a FoV of
7.5′′×7.5′′ (701×701). In order to detect the brown dwarf in each
frame where the central star was saturated, we stacked together
each 20 consecutive images and gathered them into two separate
cubes: the scientiﬁc one composed of long exposure time frames
and the one with unsaturated frames to be used as model PSFs.
We thus obtained four scientiﬁc cubes, each with 140 frames,
and four model PSFs cubes, each with 14 frames.
To further improve the contrast, we also removed the bad
pixels with a sigma-clipping and the "striping" that occurs in
LMIRCam images due to the vertical detector channels. Fiinally,
1 https://sites.google.com/a/lbto.org/lbti/data-retrieval-
reduction/distortion-correction-and-astrometric-solution
Article number, page 18 of 19

<<<PAGE 19>>>
Lazzoni et al.: Disks or satellites around DI companions
we applied the PSF subtraction using themultiple_framebyframe
routine, considering one model PSF every ten frames of the sci-
entiﬁc cube.
Unfortunately, the NOD-B images for both apertures were
obtained with the target close to the edge of LMIRCam’s FoV
and we have discovered that uncorrected image distortion ap-
pears to aﬀect the image quality in this case. Thus, these frames
could not be used in our analysis. The NOD-A cubes were, in-
stead, good-quality observations and we used them both individ-
ually and jointly to determine the parameters presented in the
text.
Article number, page 19 of 19