<<<PAGE 1>>>
arXiv:2302.04646v4  [astro-ph.EP]  30 Mar 2023
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. Exomoons ©ESO 2023
March 31, 2023
Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
V aleri V . Makarov1 and Michael Efroimsky2
1 US Naval Observatory, 3450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington DC 20392 USA
e-mail: valeri.makarov@gmail.com
2 US Naval Observatory, 3450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington DC 20392 USA
e-mail: michael.efroimsky@gmail.com
Received November 22, 2022; accepted February 9, 2023
ABSTRACT
Context. It is conceivable that a few thousand conﬁrmed exoplanets in itially harboured satellites similar to the moons of the Sol ar
System or larger. We ask the question of whether some of them h ave survived over the æons of dynamical evolution to the pres ent
day. The dynamical conditions are harsh for exomoons in such systems because of the greater inﬂuence of the host star and o f the
tidal torque it exerts on the planet.
Aims. We investigate the stability niches of exomoons around hund reds of innermost exoplanets for which the needed parameter s are
known today, and we determine the conditions of these moons’ long-term survival. General lower and upper bounds on the ex omoon
survival niches are derived for orbital separations, perio ds, and masses.
Methods. The fate of an exomoon residing in a stability niche depends o n the initial relative rate of the planet’s rotation and on th e
ability of the moon to synchronise the planet by overpowering the tidal action from the star. State-of-the-art models of tidal dissipation
and secular orbital evolution are applied to a large sample o f known exoplanet systems, which have the required estimate d physical
parameters.
Results. We show that in some plausible scenarios, exomoons can preve nt close exoplanets from spiralling into their host stars, t hus
extending these planets’ lifetimes. This is achieved when e xomoons synchronise the rotation of their parent planets, o verpowering the
tidal action from the stars.
Conclusions. Massive moons are more likely to survive and help their host p lanets maintain a high rotation rate (higher than these
planets’ mean motion).
Key words. Planets and satellites: general – Planets and satellites: d ynamical evolution and stability – Planets and satellites: gaseous
planets – Planets and satellites: terrestrial planets
1. Introduction
A common convention regarding the rotation of close-in exo-
planets is that their tidal de-spinning is fully deﬁned by th e tides
generated on these planets by their host stars. It is for this rea-
son that close-in gas giants are assumed to be synchronised o r
pseudo-synchronised. We pose the question of whether a moon
orbiting a planet can change the outcome of the planet’s tida l
de-spinning and make the planet end up in a non-synchronous
(perhaps, even retrograde) spin state. Speciﬁcally, we exp lore
the possibility of a planet being synchronised not by the sta r
but by a moon. If this scenario is plausible for some inner pla n-
ets, these planets’ rotation will be much faster than the spe ed
at which they orbit the star. These planets then avoid spiral -
ing into their host stars, and maintain ﬁnite orbital eccent rici-
ties. 1 An internally synchronised planet–moon pair continues to
shrink because of the tides caused by the star, but the rate of
this process is orders of magnitude slower than the orbital d ecay
of a moon-less planet. Indeed, in an internally synchronise d or
pseudo-synchronised planet-moon system, the tidal torque act-
ing on the planet from the star is counterbalanced by the tida l
torque acting on the planet from the moon. The time-averaged
1 As follows from the ﬁrst line of Eq. (143) in Boué & Efroimsky
(2019), a rotation rate faster than the mean motion works to t idally in-
crease the semi-major axis in the two-body problem. Also, ac cording to
their equations (156 -157), fast rotators tend to boost the e ccentricity.
total torque on the planet in a stable equilibrium is nil, but both
these components continue to dissipate energy. This energy is
taken from the orbital kinetic energy of the planet and the mo on,
respectively. The supply of orbital energy is orders of magn itude
greater than the rotational energy of the planet, which make s the
decay process very slow. A decisive test of these models will
be possible once more accurate photometric measurements of
the secondary eclipses of hot Jupiters become available (i. e. the
transits of the planets behind the disks of the stars in the up per
conjunction), where a non-synchronous rotation is expecte d to
produce a measurable phase shift with the peak brightness of the
out-of-eclipse light curve. A statistically signiﬁcant sh ift towards
the evening terminator was detected for the W ASP-12b planetby
Owens et al. (2021). On a fast-rotating planet, the hot spot g en-
erated by the stellar irradiation is not stationary but rath er leads
the substellar meridian.
The dynamical evolution of exomoons in star-planet sys-
tems has been investigated in a number of publications (e.g. ,
Sasaki et al. 2012; Barnes & O’Brien 2002; Guimarães & V alio
2018). The commonly shared conclusion is that the chances of
exomoons surviving for an extended duration of time in known
planetary systems are low. Considering three basic scenari os for
a moon in such systems, with only one of these scenarios allow -
ing the moon to survive for at least 1 Gyr, Dobos et al. (2021)
conclude that the survival rate is close to nil for planets wi th or-
bital periods of 10 d or less, and that it gradually increases to
Article number, page 1 of 15

<<<PAGE 2>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
70% for periods of 300 d. The median orbital period of all de-
tected and
tentative exoplanets is about 11.8 d, and only 10% of them hav e
periods above 442 d, so we should expect to ﬁnd very few exo-
planets with moons.
In the current work, our goal is to demonstrate that there are
additional pathways for exomoons to survive, even around fa irly
close-in planets. Furthermore, exomoons can help their par ent
planets survive for longer times in the close vicinity of sta rs. As
an example of such previously ignored possibilities, moons that
are initially on retrograde orbits with respect to the spin o f a
slowly rotating planet will generate a tidal torque on the pl anet
that will be opposed to the torque caused by the star. Possibl e in
principle, this particular scenario is unlikely to play a la rge role
in real systems, because the capture of external moons onto r et-
rograde orbits is relatively rare. 2 Starting with solid principles
of tidal dynamics, we aim to show the existence of mechanisms
plausible for a long-term coexistence of moons with their planets
(most of the considered planets being dangerously close to t heir
stars). Along with Earths and super-Earths, our study addre sses
Jupiters. It is commonly assumed that close-in low-viscosi ty gi-
ant planets are synchronised by their host stars. Although t he
tidal quality of Jupiters is likely to be as high as that of our own
Jupiter (Efroimsky & Makarov 2022), the dissipation of orbi tal
energy inside a synchronised planet is almost nulliﬁed beca use
of the circularisation process bringing down the planet’s e ccen-
tricity. The fate of the planet is then deﬁned by the rotation rate
of the host star, which is often slower than the mean motion.
Slowly but relentlessly, the tidal break will remove the orb ital
energy, and the planet will plunge into the star. We however show
here that a su ﬃciently massive moon can arrest or even reverse
this process for a signiﬁcantly long time, until the moon’s o rbital
energy is depleted.
2. The Hill sphere and the reduced Hill sphere
The Hill sphere is a region where the motion of moons is deﬁned
predominantly by the gravity of the planet, and less by that of the
star. Analysis by Hamilton & Burns (1992) set its radius at
rH = ap (1 − ep)
( Mp
3 M∗
) 1/3
, (1)
where ap and ep are the planet’s semi-major axis and eccentric-
ity, while Mp and M∗ are the masses of the planet and the star,
correspondingly.
However, numerical analysis by Astakhov et al. (2003) and
Domingos et al. (2006) indicated that the orbits too closely ap-
proaching this radius become unstable in the long term, whil e
those conﬁned to a smaller domain (which we term ‘the reduced
Hill sphere’) remain stable. The radius of the reduced Hill s phere
(‘the reduced Hill radius’) for a circular ( em = 0 ) orbit of the
2 Two capture mechanisms are known to permit the acquisition o f
not only prograde but also retrograde moons: a binary-plane t gravita-
tional encounter (Agnor & Hamilton 2006) and chaos-assiste d capture
(Astakhov & Farrelly 2004; Astakhov et al. 2003). The latter mecha-
nism was studied for small irregular moons, though in princi ple it may
facilitate a capture of a larger body.
The possibility of moons’ inclination ﬂips under close enco unters is still
awaiting exploration. For comets and asteroids, such ﬂips a re deﬁnitely
possible (V alsecchi, G. B. et al. 2022).
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rp /RJup 
rH'/RJup 
Fig. 1. Reduced Hill radii of 580 known inner exoplanets versus thei r
radii in units of Jupiter’s radius. The diagonal line indica tes the equality
of the two radii.
moon is
r
′
H = B a p (1 − b e p)
( Mp
3 M∗
) 1/3
(2)
and depends on the direction of the orbit:
B = 0.49 , b = 1.03 , for prograde-orbiting moons; (3a)
B = 0.93 , b = 1.08 , for retrograde-orbiting moons . (3b)
Figure 1 shows the distribution of calculated reduced Hill
radii for a sample of 580 inner exoplanets with the necessary es-
timated parameters entering Eq. (2) provided in the NASA Ex-
oplanet Archive 3 (assuming prograde orbits). These values are
plotted against the estimated radii of the planets themselves. One
should expect the Hill spheres to be outside of the planets’ r adii,
but this seems to not always be the case. The planets orbiting
HA T-P-32, HA T-P-65, HA TS-27, HA TS-69, HIP 65 A, W ASP-
121, and W ASP-19 appear to be in violation of this condition.
These are bloated Jupiters with orbital periods between 0.7 9 and
4.64 d orbiting solar-type stars. However, caution should b e ex-
ercised with the archival data for speciﬁc exoplanets, wher e gen-
erous upper limits are sometimes given for orbital eccentri city
instead of true determinations. This concerns the planets H A T-P-
65, HA TS-27, and HA TS-69. Still, the existing models sugges t
that these giant planets, being so close to the Hill radii, sh ould
be shedding their outer layers, probably forming a gaseous d isk
around the stars. The origin of such critical proximity of in ﬂated
hot Jupiters to their host stars is not known.
Equations (2 - 3) also yield an inequality to be utilised below:
am < r ′
H ≈ B ap
( Mp
3 M∗
) 1/3
, (4)
3 https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/data.html
The version as of December 2022.
Article number, page 2 of 15

<<<PAGE 3>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
Table 1. Symbol key
Notation Explanation Reference
M∗ mass of the star
Mp mass of the planet
Mm mass of the moon
ρm density of the moon
Rp radius of the planet
Rm radius of the moon
Cp maximal moment of inertia of the planet
Cm maximal moment of inertia of the moon
θp rotation angle of the planet
ap semi-major axis of the planet
am semi-major axis of the moon
ep eccentricity of the planet
em eccentricity of the moon
np mean motion of the planet
nm mean motion of the moon
lmpq integers used to number the tidal Fourier modes eqn (20)
Flmp (i) inclination functions eqn (20)
Glpq (e) eccentricity function eqn (20)
ωlmpq Fourier modes of the tides in the planet eqn (21)
χlmpq ≡ | ωlmpq | forcing frequencies excited in the planet eqn (22)
ǫl = ǫl(ωlmpq ) tidal phase lags in the planet
kl = kl(ωlmpq ) dynamical Love numbers of the planet
Kl(ωlmpq ) = kl(ωlmpq) sin ǫl(ωlmpq ) quality functions of the planet eqn (23a)
Ql(ωlmpq) ≡ 1 / | sin ǫl(ωlmpq ) | tidal quality factors eqn (24)
rH Hill radius of the planet eqn (1)
r ′
H reduced Hill radius of the planet eqn (2)
rR Roche radius of the planet eqn (6)
a(s)
m synchronous value of the lunar semi-major axis eqn (7)
T (∗) solar polar tidal torque acting on the planet
T (m) lunar polar tidal torque acting on the planet
G Newton’s gravitational constant
am and ap being the semi-major axes of the moon and the planet.
3. The Roche radius
The Roche radius (or the Roche limit) is the closest distance at
which a moon can get to its planet without being pulled apart b y
tides. This parameter sets the lower limit on the survival ni che
for exomoons. For a spherical host, the Roche radius is given by
rR = A Rm
( Mp
Mm
) 1/3
, (5)
where Mm and Rm are the mass and radius of the moon, while
Mp is the mass of the planet.
For a strength-less moon, the dimensionless parameter
would assume the value A ≈ 2.46 borrowed from a calculation
by Chandrasekhar (1987) for an incompressible ﬂuid body. Th e
shear strength of realistic rubble piles enables them, howe ver, to
survive at smaller radii, with A ≈ 2.2 (Leinhardt et al. 2012). 4
If the moon was not captured by the planet but formed along-
side, the parameter A assumes the value 2 .2 appropriate for rub-
ble piles, because freshly accreted layers of a moon in forma tion
are rubble. So we agree to use the expression
rR = 2.2 Rm
( Mp
Mm
) 1/3
. (6)
4. The synchronous value of the semi-major axis
Deﬁned by the synchronicity condition ˙θ p = nm , the syn-
chronous value a(s)
m of the moon’s semi-major axis is
a(s)
m =










G(Mp + Mm)
/squaresmallsolid
θ
2
p










1/3
, (7)
4 For porous aggregates stronger than rubble but weaker than s olid,
like Phobos, the presence of tensile strength renders the va lues of A that
may, probably, be about or slightly below 2. (Hurford et al. 2 016).
Article number, page 3 of 15

<<<PAGE 4>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
where G = 6.6743 × 10−11 m3 kg−1 s−2 is Newton’s gravita-
tional constant, while θp and ˙θ p are the sidereal rotation angle
and rotation rate of the planet. Commonly, a(s)
m is referred to as
the synchronous radius.
Bear in mind that this radius is deﬁned only for moons in or-
bits prograde relative to the planet’s spin. For a retrograd e moon,
the semi-diurnal tidal bulge it creates on the planet will al ways
be pulling the moon back in its orbital motion, and thus will b e
working to bring it down. 5
5. A planet synchronised by its moon
As we shall see below, a moon whose mass is about one per-
cent of the planet’s mass can in some situations synchronise the
planet. For this to happen, two inequalities must be obeyed.
First, a synchronised moon’s apocentre, a(s)
m (1 + em), must
end up below the reduced Hill radius. For small em , we write
this simply as
a(s)
m < r ′
H . (8)
Combined with formulae (2), (3a), and (7), this inequality i n-
dicates that the planet’s mean motion must be about ﬁve times
smaller than its rotation rate:
np < 0.198
/squaresmallsolid
θ p (1 − 1.03 ep)3/2 . (9)
Second, a synchronised moon’s pericentre, a(s)
m (1 − em), must
be higher than the planet’s Roche radius rR. For low em , it is
suﬃcient to simply compare a(s)
m with rR. By inserting Eqs. (6)
and (7) into the inequality
rR < a(s)
m (10)
and approximating the moon’s density with that of our own
Moon, we ﬁnd (see Appendix A) that the planet’s rotation rate
in the end state, when it is synchronised by the moon, must obe y
/squaresmallsolid
θ p < 1.07 hr −1 . (11)
This sets a lower bound on the length of the sidereal day of the
planet:
T p = 2 π
/squaresmallsolid
θ p
> 5.87 hr . (12)
The sidereal year of almost all known exoplanets satisﬁes th e
same restriction: 6
Pp = 2 π
np
> 5.87 hr . (13)
Bear in mind that we are addressing the planets synchronised by
their moons, not stars. So the coincidence of the low bounds ( 12)
and (13) in no way implies the equality of
/squaresmallsolid
θ p and np .
A close-in planet lacking a moon or having a moon incapable
of synchronising the planet either will be tidally synchron ised by
5 The principal input into
/squaresmallsolid
a m contributed by the lunar tides in the planet
is of the same sign as
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm (Boué & Efroimsky 2019, Section 4.2).
This result, however, was derived with nm positive deﬁnite. So, for a
retrograde moon, we must set
/squaresmallsolid
θ p negative — which again will render
tidal descent.
6 As of November 2021, of the 4409 exoplanets with orbital peri -
ods Pp determined, 4405 have periods longer than 5 .87 hr. Exceptions
from this rule are: K2-137 b, KIC 10001893 b, KOI-55 b, PSR J17 19-
1438 b.
the star or will end up in a higher spin-orbit resonance, if it has
a suﬃcient eccentricity (Makarov et al. 2018). According to Eq.
(150) from Boué & Efroimsky (2019), the tides in a synchro-
nised planet will be working to reduce the planet’s semimajo r
axis. The planet will therefore spiral in and get engulfed by the
star.
As an interesting aside, lower bound (13) on the planet pe-
riod is remarkably close to the shortest rotation periods of ﬁeld
solar-type stars (Schmitt & Mittag 2020). This suggests tha t a
moon-less planet, if it migrates too close to the star, is not ca-
pable of synchronising the star rotation, and therefore get s de-
stroyed. Indeed, had such a planet been able to orbit faster t han
5.87 hr and to synchronise the star, then stars with such short
rotation periods would have been observed — which is not the
case.
On the other hand, a planet with a period of ∼ 6 h can hardly
harbour a moon, because the gap between the planet’s radius a nd
reduced Hill radius (Sect. 2) vanishes in most cases or becom es
quite small. We estimate that for our working sample of 580 in -
ner exoplanets, the reduced Hill radius computed for the cri tical
value of orbital period is above the actual planet’s radius f or just
26 systems, with only 5 of them having a niche for exomoons
that is wider than 1 Rp.
6. The niche for exomoons
For a moon to survive on an orbit around a planet, two conditions
must be fulﬁlled. They may come out stronger than (8) and (10) ,
because those were set on the end-state — while here we intend
to address moons’ parameters prior to synchronisation.
(1) Its apocentre must be conﬁned to the reduced Hill sphere:
am (1 + em) < r
′
H ; (14)
(2) Its pericentre must stay above the Roche sphere:
am (1 − em) > rR . (15)
The following sequence of inequalities ensues:
r
′
H > am > rR . (16)
Most of the known exoplanets have r
′
H > rR, but not all.
We ﬁnd 31 planets that possibly violate this rule, and, there fore,
cannot harbour any satellites. Figure 2 shows them as dots ly -
ing below the diagonal line of equal radii. These planets hav e
ultra-short periods between 0.447 d (TOI-561 b) and 3.313 d
(HA TS-10 b), with more than half (18) being shorter than 1 d.
Their eccentricities are often unknown, with only upper lim its
given in the literature. For example, e < 0.519 for HA TS-69 b.
In our calculations involving the reduced Hill radius, this intro-
duces additional dispersion and bias. The outlying planets are
likely to have small eccentricities below the sensitivity t hreshold
of the transit detection method. The planet HA TS-69 b, for ex -
ample, orbits an inconspicuous solar twin that does not have any
known stellar companions or detectable outer planetary compan-
ions (Hord et al. 2021), in agreement with the eccentricity m i-
gration model. There are no alternative mechanisms to excit e the
eccentricity of close planets apart from outer massive pert urbers.
Only one of the planets in this category, HIP 65 A b (with e = 0),
resides in a wide stellar binary with a smaller red dwarf comp an-
ion, which apparently failed to perturb its orbit because of the
signiﬁcant separation > 230 AU.
Additional useful constraints on the orbital parameters of the
planet-moon system can be obtained from the brackets for the
Article number, page 4 of 15

<<<PAGE 5>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
1
2
3
4
5
rR/RJup 
rH'/RJup 
Fig. 2. Reduced Hill radii of 580 known inner exoplanets versus thei r
estimated Roche limits in units of Jupiter’s radius. The das hed diago-
nal line marks the locus of equal radii where the dynamical ni che for
satellites vanishes. The planets that fall below this line c annot have any
stable satellites.
moon separation. By Kepler’s third law for the planet-moon a nd
star-planet pairs, we have:
Mp P2
m
M∗ P2p
≃ a3
m
a3p
. (17)
Combining this approximate equality with inequality (4) an d
with the expression (2) for the reduced Hill radius, we obtai n
Pm
Pp
< 0.198 (1 − 1.03 ep)3/2 . (18)
This result is stronger than formula (4), because it pertain s to
a prograde moon at any stage of its evolution, not only at the
synchronous end state (if that state is achieved).
Thus, prograde moons cannot have longer orbital periods
than about 0 .2 Pp . This condition is obviously satisﬁed for the
Earth-Moon system. We note that this upper bound on the orbital
period ratio is independent of the three masses.
On the other hand, utilising the lower bound on the moon
separation am > rR , Eq. (6), and Kepler’s third law, we derive
the lower bound on the orbital period of the moon in its surviv al
niche:
Pm > 5.55
√G ρm
= [3.26 hr]
√
ρMoon / ρm , (19)
where ρm is the average density of the moon and ρMoon is the
average density of the Moon. This constraint depends only on
the average density.
7. Mutual synchronisation of a planet with its moon
In this work, we consider the case of a planet mutually synchr o-
nised with its moon. This conﬁguration can be attained withi n
two diﬀerent scenarios, the ﬁrst of which can be initiated by var-
ious means.
Scenario 1.
Mutual synchronism is achieved through mutual receding ac-
companied with a slow-down of both bodies’ rotation. For
this process to begin, the moon should ﬁnd itself above the
synchronicity orbit of the planet, and should not have too
large an eccentricity. 7 This initial state can be prepared by
three diﬀerent methods:
(1.1) the moon is formed above the synchronicity orbit of the
planet;
(1.2) the moon is captured above the synchronicity orbit of t he
planet;
(1.3) a rapidly rotating moon is formed or captured slightly
below synchronism. If the initial spin is in the vicinity of
the quality function peak above the synchronous rate and
the separation from the synchronous orbit is small, the
tides in the moon can overpower those in the planet and
can push the moon above the synchronous radius.
Whichever of the three mechanisms places the moon above
the planet’s synchronous orbit, the moon begins receding
away, and the planet begins slowing down its spin.
Scenario 2.
Mutual synchronism is achieved for a moon in a prograde
orbit below the synchronous radius, or a moon in a retro-
grade orbit. In both cases, the tides in the planet work to
shrink the moon’s orbit. The tides in the moon, if its spin is
synchronised with the orbital motion, work in the same di-
rection when em > 0. As the moon descends onto the planet,
the planet’s spin is either accelerated, for a prograde moon ,
or decelerated, for a retrograde moon. In the latter case, th e
planet may stop rotating in the sidereal frame — and then
start rotating in the opposite direction. If the planet’s an gu-
lar acceleration rate is higher than the rate of moon’s orbit
decay, the planet’s spin can be equalised with the orbital ro -
tation before the moon reaches the Roche radius.
Our overall objective is to understand how the star-induced tidal
torque is acting on an internally synchronised planet-moon sys-
tem.
8. Tidal torques
To simplify the terminology, here we often employ the adjec-
tives ‘solar’ and ‘lunar’ in application to the properties o f the
star and the moon. For example, instead of the clumsy ‘star-
generated tidal torque’ or ‘moon-generated tidal torque’, we say
‘solar torque’ or ‘lunar torque’ (with the word ‘tidal’ omit ted,
because no other torques are to be included).
8.1. Setting
Our study will address a two-dimensional conﬁguration: the lu-
nar orbit coincides with the ecliptic, while both the planetary and
7 The limitation on eccentricities is needed here, because a s ynchro-
nised moon with an appreciable eccentricity can move inside the syn-
chronicity orbit, if the planet-produced tides in it are abl e to overpower
the moon-produced tides in the planet. This is probably how P hobos
crossed the synchronous orbit of Mars (Bagheri et al. 2021).
Article number, page 5 of 15

<<<PAGE 6>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
lunar obliquities onto the equator of the planet are zero. Th is will
enable us to consider only the polar components of tidal torq ues.
A justiﬁcation for the neglect of the lunar orbit inclinatio n
on the planet’s orbit comes from the assumption that a signif -
icant initial inclination would make the hierarchical trip le star-
planet-moon system subject to strong Lidov-Kozai interact ions,
which would increase interchangeably the inclinations and ec-
centricity of the inner pair (Innanen et al. 1997; Ford et al. 2000;
V eras & Ford 2010; Batygin et al. 2011; Correia et al. 2011;
V eras et al. 2018). As discussed in this paper, the dynamical
niche for satellites is quite narrow for most known exoplane ts. A
large increase in eccentricity would push the reduced Hill r adius
limit down, possibly eliminating the niche altogether per E q. (2).
On the other hand, close-in moons can be disrupted if the peri -
centre distance becomes smaller than the Roche radius. This fac-
tor further diminishes the expected frequency of exomoons. The
surviving moons are thus likely to have orbits nearly coplan ar
with the ecliptic.
Depending on the balance of the solar and lunar torques act-
ing on the close planet, their latitudinal components shoul d rel-
atively quickly align the planet’s rotation axis with eithe r the
planet-star or the planet-moon orbit axis (see Sect. 9). In t he lat-
ter case, the moons may be long-term viable near close planet s.
A limited nodal precession and nutation of the planet caused by
the residual latitudinal component of the tidal torque crea ted by
the star adds to tidal dissipation in the planet and to the ens uing
orbital evolution. Complex three-dimensional dynamical i nter-
actions in such nearly coplanar three-body systems are best in-
vestigated by numerical simulations, which are outside the scope
of this study.
8.2. Secular part of the polar torque
A derivation of the secular polar tidal torque from the Darwi n
(1880) and Kaula (1964) theory is provided in Efroimsky (201 2,
Eq. 109), see also Boué & Efroimsky (2019, Eqs. 123, 132, and
191):
T = 2 G M
′ 2
a
∞∑
l=2
( Rp
a
) 2l + 1 l∑
m=0
(l − m)!
(l + m)! m
(20)
l∑
p=0
F
2
lmp(i)
∞∑
q=−∞
G
2
lpq (e) Kl(ωlmpq) ,
where M
′
is the mass of the perturber, G is the Newton grav-
ity constant, while Rp is the radius of the planet. The expres-
sion involves the inclination functions Flmp(i) and the eccen-
tricity functions related to the Hansen coe ﬃcients by Glpq (e) =
X −(l+1), l−2p
l−p+q (e) , see e.g., Murray & Dermott (1999, p. 232).
The quantities
ωlmpq ≡ (l − 2p) ˙ω + (l − 2p + q)n + m ( ˙Ω− ˙θp )
(21)
≈ (l − 2p + q)n − m ˙θp
are the Fourier tidal modes over which both the potential of t he
perturber and the additional tidal potential of the body are ex-
panded. These modes’ absolute values,
χlmpq =| ωlmpq | , (22)
are the actual physical forcing frequencies excited in the p lanet
by the perturber. 8
The order-l quality functions of the perturbed body are
Kl(ωlmpq ) ≡ kl(ωlmpq) sin ǫl(ωlmpq ) , (23a)
where both the Love numbers kl and the phase lags ǫl are func-
tions of the Fourier tidal modes ωlmpq . They can also be written
as 9
Kl(ωlmpq ) ≡ kl(ωlmpq )
Ql(ωlmpq ) Sign (ωlmpq ) , (23b)
where Ql are the tidal quality factors introduced via
Q−1
l (ωlmpq ) = | sin ǫl(ωlmpq ) | . (24)
Phase lags ǫl(ωlmpq ) being odd functions, their absolute val-
ues Q−1
l (ωlmpq ) are obviously even. Even are also the Love num-
bers kl(ωlmpq ) . So, altogether, the quality functions are odd. A
function Kl(ωlmpq ) changes its sign when the system is crossing
the lmpq spin-orbit resonance, one deﬁned by ωlmpq = 0 . On this
crossing, the passage of the function Kl(ωlmpq) through the zero
value goes rapidly but smoothly (see Eq. 32).
Since the functions kl(ωlmpq ) and Q−1
l (ωlmpq) are even, we
always can regard both the Love numbers and quality factors a s
functions of the positive deﬁnite physical frequencies (22 ):
kl(ωlmpq ) = kl(χlmpq ) , Ql(ωlmpq ) = Ql(χlmpq) . (25)
Combined with Eq. (23b), this gives:
Kl(ωlmpq ) = Kl(χlmpq) Sign( ωlmpq ) . (26)
The quality functions appear not only in the expression for
the tidal torque, but also in the formulae for the tidal heati ng rate
and the tidal evolution rates of orbital elements. A detaile d dis-
cussion of the generic shape of a quality function Kl(ωlmpq ) is
provided in Appendix B. There, it is explained that such a fun c-
tion has the form of a kink, as in Fig. 3. For simple rheologies
(Maxwell, Andrade), the kink has only one sharp maximum on
the right and one sharp minimum on the left. These principal e x-
trema come into being due to interplay of self-gravitation w ith
rheological response. 10 For more elaborate rheological models
containing Debye peaks (i.e., Sundberg-Cooper or Burgers) , ad-
ditional maxima — and symmetrically located minima — will
emerge. Additional local extrema show up also when a multi-
layer structure of the body is taken into consideration. 11 One
way or another, the principal extrema shown in Fig. 3 exist fo r
any realistic rheology and supersede in magnitude other pos sible
peaks.
Dictated by hydrodynamical e ﬀects, tidal response of gas
planets is much more complex. Nonetheless, qualitatively, the
behaviour near a resonance must be similar: the largest peak s
8 This can be observed from Eqs. (15 - 16) in Efroimsky & Makarov
(2013).
9 Be mindful that Sign ǫl(ωlmpq) = Sign ωlmpq , see Eq. (24) in
Efroimsky & Makarov (2013).
10 Gravity is working to pull the tidal bulge down, thus adding t o the
rigidity of the tidally perturbed body. Weak at frequencies much higher
than the inverse Maxwell time, this e ﬀect becomes relevant at lower
frequencies — and leading in the zero-frequency limit.
11 As was demonstrated by Gevorgyan (2021), the tidal response of a
homogeneous body that obeys the Sundberg-Cooper model is id entical
to the response of a body consisting of two Maxwell or Andrade layers
that have di ﬀerent relaxation times. In application to the Moon, this
correspondence was explored in detail by Walterova et al. (2 022).
Article number, page 6 of 15

<<<PAGE 7>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
tidal mode ω 
kl (ω)  sin ε l (ω) 
Fig. 3. Typical shape of the quality function Kl(ω) = kl(ω) sin ǫl(ω) ,
where ω is a shortened notation for the tidal Fourier mode ωlmpq .
(Reprinted from Icarus, V ol. 241, Noyelles et al., Spin-orb it evolution
of Mercury revisited, Pages 26-44, Copyright (2014), with p ermission
from Elsevier.)
are deﬁned, at large, by combination of material response an d
self-gravitation, and the transition through zero must be s mooth.
As demonstrated in Appendix B for a homogeneous
Maxwell sphere (in realistic situations, also for a homogen eous
Burgers, Andrade, or Sundberg-Cooper sphere, see Footnote17),
the depicted in Fig. 3 two extrema of Kl(ω) are positioned at
ωpeak l = ± τ−1
M
1 + Al
, (27)
the corresponding extrema being
K(peak)
l = ± 3
2 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
. (28)
In these expressions, Al are dimensionless e ﬀective rigidities
rendered by Eq. (B.6). Proportional to the mean shear rigidi ty µ,
these parameters serve as dimensionless measures of rheolo gy-
dominated versus gravity-dominated tidal responses, see S ects.
4.1 and 5.2 in Efroimsky (2015). For the Earth, Mars, and the
Moon, the dimensionless parameter A2 assumes the values of
2.2 , 19 , and 64 .5 , correspondingly. Assuming that an exomoon
is smaller than Mars, we have 12
Al
(1 + Al) ≃ 1 , for moons , (29)
wherefrom
K(peak)
l ≃ ± 3
4 (l − 1) , for moons , (30)
an observation to be utilised down the road.
Equation (28) also renders an overall limit on the values of a
quality function:
|Kl| < 3
4 (l − 1) . (31)
Within the narrow inter-peak interval, the functions Kl(ω) are
near-linear:
| ω | < | ωpeakl | =⇒ Kl(ω) ≃ 3
2 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
ω
| ωpeak l | , (32)
12 Approximations (29) and (30) may be not so exact for middle-s ized
and large planets. For example, a hypothetical super-Earth of the same
rheology as the Earth and of a twice larger radius, will have A2 = 0.55
and, consequently, Al/(1 + Al) ≃ 1/3 and K(peak)
l ≃ ± 1
4 (l − 1) .
and fall oﬀas ω−1 outside it:
| ω | > | ωpeak l | =⇒ Kl(ω) ≃ 3
2 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
| ωpeakl |
ω , (33)
an expression to be employed shortly.
8.3. Approximation valid under no synchronism
The secular part of the polar torque may be approximated with
T = T
l=2
+ O
(
ǫ (R/a)7 )
(34)
= T(lmp)=(220) + O(ǫ i 2) + O
(
ǫ (R/a)7)
,
where ǫ is a typical value of a phase lag (Efroimsky 2012, Eq.
114). Details on this are provided in Appendix C, both for the
solar torque acting on the planet and for the lunar torque act ing
on the planet. When the planet is not synchronised with eithe r
orbital motion, the leading parts of the lunar and solar torq ues
are
T
(m)
(lmp)=(2200)
= 3
2
G M 2
m
am
( Rp
am
) 5
K2( 2nm − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p ) (35)
and
T (∗)
(lmp)=(2200)
= 3
2
G M 2
∗
ap
( Rp
ap
) 5
K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p ) , (36)
correspondingly. Hence, in neglect of O(e2), the planetary rota-
tion is described by
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p = 3
2 G ξ−1 M −1
p R 3
p
[
M 2
m a−6
m K2( 2nm − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
(37)
+ M 2
∗ a−6
p K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
]
,
ξ being the prefactor of the moment of inertia ξ Mp R 2
p of the
planet. The lunar and stellar inputs in expression (37) rela te as
T
(m)
(lmp)=(2200)
T (∗)
(lmp)=(2200)
=
( Mm
M∗
) 2 ( ap
am
) 6 K2( 2nm − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
. (38)
If the moon is massive and close enough, it can synchronise
the planet. As the system is approaching synchronicity (i.e ./squaresmallsolid
θ p → nm ), the quality function K2( 2nm − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p ) in the numer-
ator of (38) goes through a sharp peak and rapidly approaches
zero (see Fig. 3). The solar torque will then try to drive the planet
out of its synchronism with the moon. Whether it will succeed
in doing this will depend on the ratio between the peak value o f
the lunar torque and a non-peak value of the solar torque.
9. Two pathways to a synchronous planet–moon
system
As we explained in Sect. 7, mutual synchronism of the planet and
the moon can be attained within two distinct dynamical scenarios
having diﬀerent initial conditions.
Article number, page 7 of 15

<<<PAGE 8>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
9.1. Scenario 1: The moon is initially on a wide prograde orbi t
The ﬁrst pathway to the 1:1 inner resonance is for the moons
that are initially above the synchronous radius. By constru ction,
the initial mean motion of such a moon falls short of the ini-
tial rotation rate of the planet: nm <
/squaresmallsolid
θ p . Both the tides raised
in the planet by the moon and the tides raised in the planet by
the star are working in the same direction — to slow down the
spin of the planet and, consequently, to increase its synchr onic-
ity radius. The moon is receding from the planet (and, possi-
bly, is increasing its eccentricity em ). The planet-moon 1:1 spin-
orbit resonance can be reached if the growing synchronous ra -
dius catches up with the expanding orbit while the moon is sti ll
within the reduced Hill sphere. We now show that the vicinity of
this resonance may be stable under certain conditions, whic h are
plausible.
9.1.1. Approach to synchronism
Under the exact planet–moon synchronicity, i.e., for nm =
/squaresmallsolid
θ p ,
the e0 part of the lunar torque (C.1) vanishes, while the O(e2)
part of this torque survives and becomes leading. It writes a s:
T
(m)
moon−synchr = 12 e2
m
G M 2
m
am
( R
am
) 5
K2( nm ) + O(e4
mǫ) , (39)
the stellar torque still being given by expression (36).
Quadratic in eccentricity, torque (39) may appear to be much
smaller than the torque exerted by the star. However, it is no t
the small torque at the exact resonance but the maximum torqu e
value at a slightly shifted peak of the tidal quality functio n that
matters in the subtle mechanism of resonance capture.
In the vicinity of the 1:1 resonance, the quadrupole tidal
quality of the planet, K2(ω2200), is an odd function of the semi-
diurnal tidal mode
ω2200 = 2 (nm −
/squaresmallsolid
θ p) , (40)
as in Fig. 3, with two symmetric extrema bracketing the point of
resonance crossing. Were it not for the star, the 1:1 planet- moon
spin-orbit resonance would imply nm =
/squaresmallsolid
θ p , and consequently
ω2200 = 0 , and therefore T
(m)
(lmp)=(2200)
= 0 according to Eq. (35).
In a triple system under consideration, the tides generated by the
star in the planet are working to drive the planet out of its sp in-
orbit resonance with the moon. Aiming to synchronise the pla net
not with the moon but with the star, the solar tides are slowin g
down the spin of the planet. For this reason, the tidal mode ω2200
is not exactly zero but acquires a slightly positive value. T he
value of the quality function K2 begins to climb, from the left,
the steep positive peak in Fig. 3. Therefrom emerges a positi ve
lunar torque compensating for the negative solar torque — an d
the equilibrium stays stable.
For the planet to leave said equilibrium, that is, to break ou t
of the resonance, the tidal torque from the star has to overpo wer
the peak tidal torque from the moon. The maximal tidal qualit y
value achieved at the peak frequency depends on the e ﬀective
rigidity Al via Eq. (28). For l = 2, the tidal quality of the planet
cannot exceed 3/4, for a homogeneous planet. For our purposes,
it will be justiﬁed to use in the following estimates the maxi mal
possible value of the torque exerted on the planet by the moon .
Using this value, we write the ratio of the torques (given by E qs.
30 and 36, correspondingly) wherewith the star and the moon are
acting on the planet:
| T (∗) |
T (m, peak) ≃ 4
3
( M∗
Mm
) 2 ( am
ap
) 6 ⏐
⏐
⏐K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p s)
⏐
⏐
⏐. (41)
For the moon to remain locked in the 1:1 spin-orbit resonance ,
this ratio must be less than unity.
The equilibrium state of a synchronised planet–moon system
depends on the composition of the planet. To illustrate this , we
resort to Fig. 4. There, the blue solid line depicts the leadi ng,
semi-diurnal component (35) of the lunar tidal torque appli ed
to the planet. Proportional to the semi-diurnal quality fun ction
K2(ω2200) = K2( 2(nm −
/squaresmallsolid
θ p) ) , this torque naturally comes out
kink-shaped. Bear in mind, though, that in Fig. 4 this torque is
given as a function of the di ﬀerence
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm , not of the semi-
diurnal frequency ω2200 = 2 (nm −
/squaresmallsolid
θ p) . The red solid line in Fig.
4 is the opposite torque with which the planet is acting on the
moon’s orbit.
Within Scenario 1, the moon starts above synchronism, so
initially we have
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm > 0 . As the moon is receding, and the
planet is slowing down its rotation, the system is moving, in Fig.
4, from the right to the left. At the point of exact 1:1 resonan ce,
where
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm = 0 , the tidal torque generated by the moon van-
ishes, while the negative torque applied by the star on the pl anet
(the dashed blue line) is ﬁnite. For a rigid planet with a ﬁnit e
triaxial elongation, this negative solar torque gets compe nsated
by a positive torque from the moon, caused by a constant tilt
of the planet’s longest axis with respect to the moon directi on,
which resembles the constant tilt of the Moon with respect to the
mean Earth direction (Rambaux & Williams 2011). This way, a
planet having a permanent dynamic triaxiality (a terrestrial or icy
world) can be captured into an exact spin-orbit resonance wi th
the moon, due to the presence of a restoring triaxial torque.
Inner giant planets are more likely to be ﬂuid, apart from a
possible compact rigid core. If their e ﬀective viscosity is lower
than a critical value (Makarov 2015), the planet gets locked in
a pseudo-sychronous rotation, a long-term stable equilibr ium
where the relative frequency
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm changes with time very
slowly, as we shall see now.
Since no restoring triaxial torque is acting on a ﬂuid planet at
the point of exact 1:1 synchronism, evolution of this planet does
not stop on arrival to that resonance. Indeed, for
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm = 0 the
net torque is negative due to the presence of the negative tor que
from the star. As a result of this, the angular acceleration
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p is
negative there. In Fig. 4, the system transcends the resonan ce
and keeps moving leftwards — and approaches the dotted verti -
cal line, which denotes a situation where the two torques act ing
on the planet are compensating each other. There, the angula r
acceleration of the planet becomes zero:
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p = 0 . This state is
still not the end point, and gets transcended too, because a n ega-
tive torque from the planet (shown by the red curve) is acting on
the lunar orbit. Impelled by this torque, the moon is now slow ly
descending, and the value of nm is increasing. Thus, the negative
relative frequency
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm is decreasing, and the system keeps
moving leftwards in the ﬁgure.
The system eventually reaches an quasi-equilibrium point re-
siding somewhere to the left of the dotted vertical line, but to the
right of the peak tidal torque. The equilibrium point is wher e the
relative angular acceleration equalises, i.e.
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p =
/squaresmallsolid
n m . This equi-
librium, however, will be slowly evolving. Indeed, in the in ter-
val between said peak and the dotted line, the net torque on th e
Article number, page 8 of 15

<<<PAGE 9>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
T m, peak
0
00
θ

p - nm
torque
Fig. 4. Schematic depiction of the three torques involved in the qua si-
stable pseudo-synchronous equilibrium of the planet-moon system. The
tidal torque wherewith the moon is acting on the planet (soli d blue
line) is coupled with an opposite torque wherewith the plane t is act-
ing on the orbit of the moon (red curve). The negative tidal to rque on
the planet from the star (dashed blue line) is weakly depende nt on the
relative frequency. The vertical dotted line indicates the location where
the tidal torques acting on the planet are equalised. Secula r equilibrium
is achieved between this location and 0.
planet is positive, resulting in a spin-up. The net torque on the
moon’s orbit is negative, so the moon is very slowly descendi ng
back onto the planet. Therefore, in Scenario 1, the moon of a
ﬂuid planet is initially rapidly receding, and then, on arri val to
equilibrium, begins to slowly descend.
In this complex pseudo-equilibrium, there is one source of
energy (the orbital energy of the moon) and three sinks (tida l
dissipation in the planet, planet’s rotation spin-up, and t he ex-
pansion of the planet’s orbit around the star). From the ener gy
exchange aspect, the necessary condition for this equilibr ium to
be stable is ˙Ekin / | ˙Eorb| < 1 , that is to say, the rate of the released
orbital energy should be greater than the rate of the planet’ s rota-
tional energy. This condition coincides with the requireme nt that
the right-hand part of Eq. (50) should be less than 1. The devi a-
tion from the exact synchronicity is expected to slowly dimi nish
due to the decay of the moon’s orbit and the corresponding in-
crease of the amplitude of the tidal torque.
The relative contribution of the lunar tide (as compared to
the solar one) diminishes and becomes minimal near the reduc ed
Hill radius. Using inequality (4) and the Kepler law, we obta in
the condition on the torque ratio required for the moon to rem ain
locked in the 1:1 spin-orbit resonance up to the Hill radius a s
| T (∗) |
T (m, peak) ≤ 0.002
( Mp
Mm
) 2 ⏐
⏐
⏐K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
⏐
⏐
⏐< 1 . (42)
For realistic moons whose mass is about 1% of the planet’s mass,
this condition is fulﬁlled if the tidal quality of the planet at the
solar-tide frequency satisﬁes
⏐
⏐
⏐K2( 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p )
⏐
⏐
⏐< 1
20 . (43)
Inequality (43) is easily obeyed even by Earth-like terrest rial
planets, because the rate of the planet’s rotation in our sce nario
is
/squaresmallsolid
θ p ≃ nm ≫ np , (44)
and therefore the semi-diurnal tidal frequency
χ = χ2200 = | ω2200 | = | 2np − 2
/squaresmallsolid
θ p | ≃ 2 nm (45)
is much greater than the degree-two peak frequency
χpeak2 = | ωpeak2 | =
τ−1
M
1 + A2
, (46)
which is close to zero. For χ ≫ χpeak2 , the quadrupole quality
function is given by expression (33), with l = 2 :
K2(ω) = 3
2
A2
1 + A2
| ωpeak 2 |
ω = 3
2
A2
(1 + A2)2
1
ω τM
. (47)
The third fraction in this expression, 1 /( ω τM
) , assumes very
small values for planets with the mean Maxwell times longer
than their orbital periods around the host stars (like the Ea rth or
Mars — planets whose Maxwell times are in the hundreds of
years). This warrants the smallness of K2(ω) of these planets.
The mean Maxwell times of hot Jupiters and hot super-
Earths may be comparable to or even shorter than these plan-
ets’ orbital periods, in which case the factor 1 /( ω τM
) is not
warranted to be small. For such planets, however, the e ﬀective
rigidities A2 are very large 13. Hence, the ratio A2/ (1 + A2)2
is vanishingly small, and the condition for resonance is sti ll ful-
ﬁlled, even at the maximum planet-moon separation equal to t he
reduced Hill radius.
9.1.2. Competition in speed
In Scenario 1, the 1:1 resonance, nm ≃
/squaresmallsolid
θ p , must be attained
before the moon reaches its reduced Hill radius. Since in thi s
scenario the moon starts above synchronism (
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm > 0 ),
a conﬁguration with
/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm = 0 can be achieved only if
d
dt
( /squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm
)
< 0 , that is to say, if
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p <
/squaresmallsolid
n m . (48)
Both these rates being negative, we can rewrite the above as
|
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p | > |
/squaresmallsolid
n m | . (49)
Thus, the absolute rate of the planet’s spin-down (which is equiv-
alent to the lengthening of the day on Earth) must be higher than
the absolute rate of moon’s orbital slowdown.
As demonstrated in Appendix D, in a two-body planet-moon
system (i.e., in neglect of the torques from star) the ratio o f the
orbital expansion and the planet’s spin-down rate, for em = 0
and Mp Mm/(Mp + Mm) ≈ Mm , is:
/squaresmallsolid
n m
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p
≈ 3 ξ Mp
Mm
( Rp
am
) 2
, (50)
which is independent of the tidal quality or a speciﬁc tidal m odel.
Within the considered scenario, both the orbital angular ac celer-
ation in the numerator and the spin acceleration in the denom i-
nator of this expression are initially negative.
From Eq. (49), the necessary condition for the moon’s sur-
vival is that the value of ratio (50) must become less than 1, b e-
ginning from some value am. Assuming for an estimate that the
13 From Eq. (B.6), we have Al ∝ µ. Also, within the Maxwell model
an approach to viscosity dominance (i.e., to the lack of shea r rigidity)
implies J − →0, which is µ − → ∞ (Efroimsky 2015, Section 5.2.3).
Article number, page 9 of 15

<<<PAGE 10>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
factor 3 ξ equals 1, we get a limit on the moon’s semi-major axis
value, starting from which inequality (49) must become vali d:
am > acrit = Rp
√
Mp
Mm
. (51)
If condition (49) never gets obeyed, the moon will leave the
reduced Hill sphere before synchronising the planet, and wi ll
eventually be lost. On the other hand, the fulﬁlment of condi tion
(49) since the birth of the moon is not necessary for synchron isa-
tion to happen. Right after accretion, the moon must be locat ed
above synchronism (as required by Scenario 1), but it may sti ll
be so close to the planet, that the right-hand side of Eq. (50) is
larger than unity. In this situation, while both
/squaresmallsolid
n m and
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p are neg-
ative, the moon’s orbital recession is initially going fast er than
the planet’s despinning. In the course of recession, am is grow-
ing, and, according to Eq. (50) the evolution of the di ﬀerence/squaresmallsolid
θ p − nm may reverse. If, beginning from some value of am , in-
equality (49) gets satisﬁed, the moons acquires a chance to s yn-
chronise its host planet.
A moon of 1% relative mass should be initially separated by
more than ten planet’s radii. The Moon, for example, is well o ut-
side this critical radius, and the lengthening of the day is f aster
than the expansion rate of the lunar orbit. So the Moon will even-
tually synchronise the Earth. 14 Equation (50) does not take into
account the contribution of the solar tidal brake, which in t his
scenario will make |
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p | larger and push the lower bound of am
slightly lower.
9.1.3. Scenario 1 is realisable only for small planets
Replacing, in Eq. (51), am with the reduced Hill radius r ′
H , we es-
timate the minimum relative mass of the moon, Mm/Mp, required
to achieve the critical radius within the reduced Hill spher e:
Mm
Mp
>
( Rp
r ′
H
) 2
. (52)
Figure 5 shows the results for 580 inner exoplanets from our
working sample, which have all the required values in the
database. The horizontal lines are shown for two speciﬁc Mm/Mp
values, 0.01 and 0.05, as benchmarks of regular and massive
moons. Only those planets that are located above these lines can
possibly have moons of the corresponding mass. We note that
the majority of hot Jupiters lie below the limit even for the m ost
imaginably massive moons, because for such Jupiters inequa lity
(52) is violated. Hence, they cannot be synchronised by moon s,
and such systems should be long-term unstable. The situatio n
is diﬀerent with smaller planets. Generally, we count 58 planets
that can be synchronised by a 0.01 Mp moon (10% of the general
sample) and 150 (26%) by a 0 .05 Mp moon.
9.2. Scenario 2: The moon is initially below the synchronous
radius
We now consider an initial conﬁguration, in which the moon
is sandwiched between the Roche radius and the synchronous
radius. The moon moves fast with respect to the planet’s sur-
face, and the tide raised by it lags the centre line. The tide b rakes
14 A calculation based on the angular-momentum conservation demon-
strates that under synchronism the lunar semi-major axis wi ll assume
the value of am = 5.72 × 108 m, which will barely ﬁt into the reduced
Hill radius r ′
H = 7.09 × 108 m.
Mm = 0.01 Mp
Mm = 0.05 Mp
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Rp /RJup 
Log10 [rH'/Rp ]
Fig. 5. Relative reduced Hill radii of 580 known inner exoplanets versus
their radii in units of Jupiter’s radius. Dashed horizontal lines mark the
lower boundaries of plot areas where these exoplanets can in principle
have moons with the smallest masses as labelled in the graph. For each
speciﬁc exoplanet shown with a dot in this plot, the mass of a s urvivable
moon should be above the dashed line (above the upper line, for putative
moons of Mm = 0.01 Mp, or above the lower line, for putative moons of
Mm = 0.05 Mp).
the orbital momentum, and the moon’s orbit decays. It appear s
that the moon is doomed to reach the Roche limit and disin-
tegrate. However, the same tidal interaction makes the plan et’s
rotation accelerate. The outcome of these two parallel proc esses
depends on the ratio of the characteristic times of orbital d ecay
and planet’s spin-up.
In this scenario, the system from the start satisﬁes
/squaresmallsolid
θ p < nm ,
where, by distinction from the previous scenario, both rate s are
now positive. Equation (50) is still valid, and this ratio mu st
be always less than 1, in order for the moon to have a chance
to synchronise the planet and survive. There is no possibili ty
of survival for the moon if this ratio is initially greater th an 1,
because as the orbit shrinks, the ratio of the accelerations can
only increase — so the moon will simply spiral onto the Roche
limit, with the planet still rotating slower than the moon’s or-
bital motion. Thus, a signiﬁcant initial separation betwee n the
planet and the moon (e.g., greater than ∼ 10 planet’s radii for
Mm/Mp = 0.01; cf. Eq. 51) is required. The initial separation
is limited from above by the reduced Hill radius. Relatively
few inner planets have su ﬃciently large reduced Hill radii, cf.
Figures 2 and 5. Thus, most of the known exoplanets, if they
have moons located below the synchronous radius, would de-
stroy these moons before their rotation could be synchronis ed.
The major di ﬀerence between Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 is
that in the former the tidal torques from the star and from the
moon, initially, are both negative, whereas in the latter, t hey are
likely to be counter-directed. E ﬀectively, the torque from the
rapidly moving moon is initially positive in Scenario 2, and the
torque from the star is negative, unless the planet initiall y rotates
slower than its mean orbital motion. Equation (38) is valid, given
that the torque from the star and the corresponding quality f unc-
Article number, page 10 of 15

<<<PAGE 11>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
tion are negative. The planet-moon system approaches the po int
of equilibrium from the left in Fig. 4, and that point is locat ed to
the left of the peak tidal torque. The general necessary cond ition
is that the torque from the moon overpowers the torque from th e
star. The exact relation between the two torques in Scenario 2
cannot be estimated without knowing the planet’s rate of rot a-
tion and its rheological properties. If we ignore the third f raction
on the right-hand side of Eq. (38) for a very rough estimate, t he
minimum mass of the moon can be estimated by using condi-
tion (19), assuming that the moon’s average density equals t hat
of the Moon, and requiring that the ratio of the torques shoul d be
greater than 1 in absolute value:
Mm > Mp
[ 3.26 hr
Pp
] 2
(53)
This turns out to be a relatively loose requirement even for t he
close-in exoplanets. Out of 1366 planets with available estimates
of Pp and Mp in the NASA Archive, 735 (54%) have lower
bounds on Mm/MMoon within 1, and 834 (61%) within 5. There is
a caveat in this consideration, though. The outcome of the co m-
petition in speed also depends on the initial rate of planet’ s ro-
tation
/squaresmallsolid
θ p and its tidal properties. If the initial rotation is very
slow,
/squaresmallsolid
θ p < np, or even retrograde, the planet also has to cross
the 1:1 spin-orbit resonance with the star before it can be sy n-
chronised by the moon. To avoid capture into this resonance,
the quality function in the numerator in Eq. (38), which is ap -
proximately K2( 2nm − 2 np) , should not be much smaller than
the peak quality of the tide caused by the star. A wide range of
fairly complex scenarios emerge for planets of terrestrial com-
position. The most important and poorly known parameters ar e
the eﬀective viscosity of the mantle, how close the mantle is to
solidus (Makarov et al. 2018), and the possible contributio n of
the Andrade-type dissipation mechanisms.
If the braking torque from the star overpowers the torque
from a small or distant moon, the planet gets synchronised by
the star. The moon will then inevitably spiral in to the Roche
radius and disintegrate. The characteristic times for this process
strongly depends on a number of planet’s parameters includi ng
its rheology. Somewhat counterintuitively, Earth-like rigid plan-
ets may be less eﬃcient in dissipating tidal energy because of the
large diﬀerence between np and nm, i.e., the high tidal frequency.
The time of orbital decay for such systems (and the life time o f
their satellites) is also dependent on the residual eccentr icity of
the moon.
10. Discussion
We have demonstrated, on very general principles, that exo-
moons can orbit most of known exoplanets only within a rela-
tively thin shell of a few to several Jupiter radii (Figs. 1 an d 2).
The dynamics of triple star-planet-moon systems is deter-
mined by the interplay of direct gravitational interaction , on the
one hand, and the tidally caused exchange of spin and orbital an-
gular momenta, on the other. For various initial conﬁgurati ons,
this interplay leads to a multitude of possible scenarios of dy-
namical evolution (Dobos et al. 2021; Tokadjian & Piro 2020,
2022). Most of them, however, predict a short-lived moon des -
tined either to spiral in to the planet’s Roche radius or to re treat
from the planet and be ejected by the gravitational pull of th e
star. In this study, we focus on the remaining possibilities for
hypothetical exomoons to survive over longer timescales. T hese
possibilities are critically dependent on the ability of the moon to
synchronise the planet, that is to say, to overpower the tida l ac-
tion from the star on the planet. This scenario is not far-fet ched,
for it is actually epitomised by our own Moon — which is in
the process of synchronising the Earth. The settings for mos t of
the known exoplanets are much less accommodating, however.
These planets are closer to their hosts and are larger than th e So-
lar System planets. On the one hand, in order to exert a strong
torque on the planet, a moon should be su ﬃciently close to it
and su ﬃciently massive. On the other hand, a very close moon
would undergo fast orbital expansion (cf. Eq. 50) with a like ly
outcome of being driven outside the Hill sphere before the planet
becomes synchronised. This places an additional lower boun d
on the relative mass of the moon, Mm/Mp , as expressed by Eq.
(52) and depicted in Fig. 5. For each speciﬁc exoplanet shown
with a dot in this plot, the mass of a survivable moon should be
well above the dashed lines (above the upper line, for putati ve
moons of Mm = 0.01 Mp, or above the lower line, for putative
moons of Mm = 0.05 Mp). Only small fractions of the avail-
able sample satisfy this condition: 10% at Mm/Mp > 0.01 , and
26% at Mm/Mp > 0.05. The majority of discovered exoplan-
ets are massive, and the median limiting mass 0 .05 Mp equals
917 MMoon , while 0 .01 Mp equals to 183 MMoon . It is doubtful
that such massive satellites are common, or that any even ex-
ist. Limiting our consideration to satellites less massive than
7 MMoon , we estimate that only 10% of all known planets sat-
isfy the Mm/Mp > 0.01 requirement. We therefore predict that
exoplanet systems stabilised by their moons should be quite rare
in the current compendium, perhaps a few per hundred.
Another set of constraints on a planet-stabilising moon can
be derived from the condition of relative angular accelerat ion
(given by Eq. 50) being less than 1. Irrespective of the rheol ogi-
cal properties of the planet, a moon has a chance to synchroni se
its host planet only if ˙ nm < ¨θ p. Otherwise, because of the nar-
rowness of the exomoon niche, it is likely to bump into either
the reduced Hill limit or the Roche limit, depending on the in i-
tial ¨θ p. The initial am is arbitrary in this equation, but it should
be between rR and r ′
H. Substituting am with these limits, and as-
suming 3 ξ = 1, we can estimate the corresponding limits M−
and M+ for the mass of the moon. The results for 580 exoplanets
with su ﬃcient data in the database are presented in Fig. 6. We
note that both these limits are one-sided, in that the mass sh ould
be greater than the limit, for the moon to survive. The Mp > M−
condition is applicable in the Scenario 1 pathway, wherein t he
moon’s orbit is initially expanding. The Mp > M+ condition is
applicable in the Scenario 2 pathway, wherein the moon’s orb it
is initially shrinking. The graph shows that the bulk of know n
inner exoplanets, seen as a dense cloud in the upper-right co rner,
require extremely massive satellites in the range of Earth- like
planets for the pathways to work. We estimate the number of ex -
oplanets with survivable moons within 5 MMoon to be 28 (out of
580) for pathway 1, and only 2 for pathway 2. Thus, exomoons
that can survive in the vicinity of known close-in planets ov er
stellar lifetime durations should be rare.
This leads to question of how theoretical cogitations can
be test using observations. Exomoons, even unusually massi ve
ones, cannot be imaged in the glare of the close host stars. Ex o-
planets harbouring synchronising moons should have ﬁnite e c-
centricities because of the residual tidal torque couple to the
star. They may also be impervious to the tidal orbital decay,
which is expected from moon-less close-in planets. Dependi ng
on the balance of the tidal torques in the star-planet pair, a moon-
synchronous planet may exhibit orbital expansion instead o f or-
bital decay. These are indirect indicators, however, which allow
for an alternative interpretation. The best promise is o ﬀered by
Article number, page 11 of 15

<<<PAGE 12>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
-2 0 2 4 6
-2
0
2
4
6
Log10 [M-/MMoon ]
Log10 [M+/MMoon ]
Fig. 6. Lower masses of exomoons that can in principle synchronise
their host planets for 580 known exoplanet systems, in units of the mass
of the Moon. The M− limits are derived from the estimated reduced
Hill radii and refer to the Scenario 1 pathway, when the exomo on is
initially above the synchronous radius. The M+ limits are derived from
the estimated Roche radii and refer to the Scenario 2 pathway , when the
exomoon is initially below the synchronous radius.
precision photometry of transiting exoplanets. The light reﬂected
by the planet modulates the general light curve due to the pla ne-
tary phases. The peak ﬂux is expected to coincide with the upp er
conjunction, which may be observable as a shallow secondary
transit. Hot Jupiters are also expected to irradiate substa ntial
amounts of infrared light from their surfaces. Due to therma l
inertia, rapidly rotating planets would have hot spots with phase
shifts leading the planet-star directions, which would res ult in an
observable shift between the overall light curve and the ecl ipse
in the upper conjunction. This, however, can be ambiguously
interpreted as a ﬁnite eccentricity of the star-planet pair . De-
spite these di ﬃculties, a search for exomoons has a tremendous
impact on our understanding of cosmogony of other planetary
worlds, and it should continue along both theoretical and pr acti-
cal routes. The two tidal-orbital pathways to long-term sur vival
of exomoons in the harsh conditions of known systems suggest
that the fate of close-in exoplanets may be intertwined with the
fate of their satellites.
Article number, page 12 of 15

<<<PAGE 13>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
Appendix A: Comparing the Roche radius and the
synchronous value of the semi-major axis
We wish to know for what critical spin rate
/squaresmallsolid
θ
(crit)
p the semi-major
axis of the synchronous orbit of the moon about the planet, a(s)
m ,
coincides with the planet’s Roche radius rR. Formulae (6) and
(7) entail:
rR < a(s)
m =⇒
(A.1)
/squaresmallsolid
θ p <
√
4
3 π ρm G
A3
√
Mp + Mm
Mp
≈
√
4
3 π ρm G
A3 .
For A = 2.2 , and for the density ρm of the moon given in kg/m3 ,
this renders:
/squaresmallsolid
θ p < 5.12 × 10−6 √ρm s−1 = 1.84 × 10−2 √ρm hr−1 , (A.2)
For the density of our Moon, ρm = 3340 kg m −3, we have
/squaresmallsolid
θ p < 1.07 hr −1 . (A.3)
Appendix B: Quality functions. A typical shape
To get an idea of a typical shape of a quality function, consid er a
tidally perturbed homogeneous body whose rheology is deﬁne d
by a complex compliance
¯J(χ) = Re
[ ¯J(χ)
]
+ i Im
[ ¯J(χ)
]
, (B.1)
with
χ = χlmpq (B.2)
being a concise notation for a tidal frequency χlmpq = |ωlmpq|
exerted by tides.
For example, the Maxwell rheology looks like
(Maxwell) ¯J(χ) = J + i
(
− 1
η χ
)
= J
(
1 − 1
τM χ
)
, (B.3)
where η is the shear viscosity, J is the unrelaxed sheer compli-
ance (the inverse of the unrelaxed shear rigidity µ), and τM =
η J = η/µ is the Maxwell time. In the more realistic Andrade
model, one has to include terms responsible for transient pr o-
cesses. The elastic, instantaneous, part of the complex com pli-
ance will, though, still be J. Neither the Maxwell nor the An-
drade model are capable of taking the relaxation of the elast ic
part into consideration. (This relaxation is, however, an a ctual
eﬀect taking place mainly due to grain-boundary sliding.) So
these models fail to distinguish between the unrelaxed and r e-
laxed values of J. To ﬁx this ﬂaw, a more detailed model by
Sundberg and Cooper should be employed. A simple review on
the topic is available in Section 3 of Walterova et al. (2022) and
in Section 2 of Bagheri et al. (2022).
As demonstrated, for example, in Efroimsky (2015), Eq.
(40), the quality function of a homogeneous body is 15
Kl(χ) ≡ kl(χ) sin ǫl(χ)
= − 3
2(l − 1)
Bl Im
[ ¯J(χ)
]
(
Re
[ ¯J(χ)
]
+ Bl
) 2
+
(
Im
[ ¯J(χ)
]) 2 (B.4a)
= − 3
2(l − 1)
Al Im
[ ¯J(χ) J−1
]
(
Re
[ ¯J(χ) J−1
]
+ Al
) 2
+
(
Im
[ ¯J(χ) J−1
]) 2 , (B.4b)
with the dimensional constants Bl and dimensionless constants
Al deﬁned as
Bl ≡ (2 l 2 + 4 l + 3)
l g ρ R = 3 (2 l 2 + 4 l + 3)
4 l π G ρ2 R2 , (B.5)
Al ≡ B l J−1 = Bl µ , (B.6)
G being Newton’s gravitational constant, and g, ρ, R be-
ing the surface gravity, density, and radius of the body. Be
mindful that expression (20) for the secular part of the po-
lar tidal torque contains not Kl(χlmpq ) but the odd function
Kl(ωlmpq ) = Kl(χlmpq) Sign( ωlmpq ) .
For the Maxwell or Andrade model, the function Kl(ωlmpq )
has the shape of a kink, shown in Figure 3. 16 Speciﬁcally, for
the Maxwell rheology (B.3), the quality functions become
Kl(ω) = 3
2(l − 1)
τM ω Al
1 + ( τM ω) 2 (
1 + A2
l
) , (B.7)
ω being a short notation for ωlmpq .
From the above expression, we observe that for a Maxwell
body — and, in realistic situations, for Andrade, Burgers, a nd
Sundberg-Cooper bodies also 17 — the extrema of the kink
Kl(ω) are residing at
ωpeakl = ± τ−1
M
1 + Al
, (B.8)
the corresponding peak values being
K(peak)
l = ± 3
4 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
. (B.9)
15 To obtain (B.4b), we divided both the numerator and denomina tor
of (B.4a) by the squared elastic part J of the complex compliance ¯J, to
make both the numerator and denominator dimensionless.
16 It can also be shown from Eq. (45) in (Efroimsky 2015) that the
frequency-dependence of sin ǫl(ω) = Q−1
l (ω) Sign(ω ) has a similar
shape, with each of the two extrema located within less than a decade
from a corresponding extremum of Kl.
17 Transient processes in these materials are pronounced main ly over
seismic frequencies, the rheological response at low frequ encies thus
being close to Maxwell. Consequently, the peaks for an Andra de body
are very similar, in both amplitude and location, to the Maxw ell values
given by Eq. (B.8).
Article number, page 13 of 15

<<<PAGE 14>>>
A&A proofs: manuscript no. Exomoons
In the inter-peak interval, a quality function Kl(ω) is almost lin-
ear: 18
| ω | < | ωpeakl | =⇒
(B.10)
Kl(ω) ≃ 3
2 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
ω
| ωpeakl | .
Outside this interval, it falls o ﬀas the inverse ω :
| ω | > | ωpeakl | =⇒
(B.11)
Kl(ω) ≃ 3
2 (l − 1)
Al
1 + Al
| ωpeak l |
ω .
From Eq. (B.9), we observe that the peaks’ amplitude is inde-
pendent of the viscosity value η . On the other hand, the spread
between the extrema is inversely proportional to η , as follows
from expression (B.8). For solid terrestrial planets, the m ean vis-
cosity values are high, wherefore the extrema are located cl ose
to zero (i.e., to the resonance ω ≡ ωnmpq = 0), so the inter-peak
interval of linear frequency-dependence of Kl is very narrow and
the peaks are sharp.
For a Maxwell or Andrade body, both the kink function
Kl(ω) and the similar to it function sin ǫl(ω) = Q−1
l (ω) Sign(ω )
have only one peak for a positive ω. The situation will, however,
change if we plug into formula (B.4), and into its counterpar t for
sin ǫn(ω) = Q−1
n (ω) Sign(ω ), a complex compliance appropri-
ate to a more accurate description, such as the Sundberg-Coo per
rheology. In that case, an additional, smaller local maximu m
will appear on the right slope (an a similar local minimum wil l
emerge on the left slope). These additional peaks may have bi g
geophysical consequences for the Moon (Walterova et al. 202 2).
18 The linearity of Kl(ω) is equivalent to the frequency-independence
of the time lag: ∆tl(ωlmpq ) = ∆t (Efroimsky & Makarov 2013). This is
why the Constant Time Lag (CTL) tidal model can be used exclus ively
for | ω | < | ωpeakl | , and is badly misleading outside this interval. Also,
it is owing to this linearity of Kl(ω) in the inter-peak interval that the
tidal torque value transcends spin-orbit resonances conti nuously, not in
abrupt steps.
Appendix C: Secular components of the solar and
lunar tidal torques acting on the planet
The quadrupole part of the torque looks like (Efroimsky 2012 ):
T
(lmp)=(220)
=
3
2
G M ′ 2
a
( Rp
a
) 5 [ 1
2304 e6 K2( − n − 2 ˙θp )
+
( 1
4 e2 − 1
16 e4 + 13
768 e6
)
K2( n − 2 ˙θp )
+
(
1 − 5 e2 + 63
8 e4 − 155
36 e6
)
K2( 2n − 2 ˙θp )
+
( 49
4 e2 − 861
16 e4 + 21975
256 e6
)
K2( 3n − 2 ˙θp )
+
( 289
4 e4 − 1955
6 e6
)
K2( 2n − ˙θp )
+ 714025
2304 e6 K2( 5n − 3 ˙θp )
]
(C.1)
+ O(e8 ǫ) + O(i 2 ǫ) ,
where M ′ is the mass of the perturber, ǫ is a typical value of
the phase lag in the perturbed planet, and the perturber’s or bital
inclination i on the planet’s equator is small enough for the order-
i2 terms to be dropped.
This formula will render the solar torque T
(∗)
, provided we
identify the mass of the perturber with that of the star: M
′
=
M ∗ , and employ the elements a = ap , e = ep , and use the
mean motion n = np of the planet’s orbit.
The formula will give us the lunar torque T
(m)
, if we set
M
′
= Mm , a = am , e = em , and n = nm .
Appendix D: Derivation of Eq. (50)
For the planet-moon two-body system, the angular momentum
is given by
H = Mp Mm
Mp + Mm
√
G (Mp + Mm) am (1 − e2
m)
(D.1)
+ Cp
/squaresmallsolid
θ p + Cm
/squaresmallsolid
θ m ,
Cp and Cm being the maximal moments of inertia of the planet
and the moon, correspondingly, and
/squaresmallsolid
θ p and
/squaresmallsolid
θ m being their ro-
tation rates. If we neglect the eccentricity and assume that the
spin angular momentum of the moon is negligible as compared
to that of the planet, the above expression will get simpliﬁe d to
H = Mp Mm
Mp + Mm
√
G (Mp + Mm) am + Cp
/squaresmallsolid
θ p , (D.2)
Article number, page 14 of 15

<<<PAGE 15>>>
V aleri V .Makarov and Michael Efroimsky: Pathways of survival for exomoons and inner exoplanets
diﬀerentiation whereof will give us:
0 = Mp Mm
Mp + Mm
√
G (Mp + Mm) d
dt a1/2
m + Cp
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p . (D.3)
Casting the deﬁnition nm =
√
G(Mp + Mm) a−3m into the form of
a1/2
m = (G (Mp + Mm))1/6n−1/3
m , we derive:
d
dt a1/2
m = − 1
3 (G(Mp + Mm))1/6 n−4/3
m
/squaresmallsolid
n m
(D.4)
= − 1
3 (G(Mp + Mm))−1/2 a2
m
/squaresmallsolid
n m ,
insertion whereof into Eq. (D.3) entails
0 = − 1
3
Mp Mm
Mp + Mm
a2
m
/squaresmallsolid
n m + Cp
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p . (D.5)
Through a dimensionless coe ﬃcient ξ, the maximal moment of
inertia is conventionally expressed as Cp = ξ Mp R2
p . Also, since
en route from Eq. (D.1) to Eq. (D.2) we set |Cm
/squaresmallsolid
θ m| ≪ | Cp
/squaresmallsolid
θ p| ,
then in about the same approximation we may put Mp Mm/(Mp+
Mm) ≈ Mm into Eq. (D.5). This gives us
0 = − 1
3 Mm a2
m
/squaresmallsolid
n m + ξ Mp R2
p
/squaresmallsolid/squaresmallsolid
θ p . (D.6)
Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to James L. Hilton for useful com-
ments and recommendations. We also thank our anonymous revi ewer for a sub-
stantial and deep review, which resulted in a more consisten t and focused paper.
References
Agnor, C. B. & Hamilton, D. P . 2006, Nature, 441, 192
Astakhov, S. A., Burbanks, A. D., Wiggins, S., & Farrelly, D. 2003, Nature, 423,
264
Astakhov, S. A. & Farrelly, D. 2004, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 354, 971
Bagheri, A., Efroimsky, M., Castillo-Rogez, J., et al. 2022 , Advances in Geo-
physics, 63, 231
Bagheri, A., Khan, A., Efroimsky, M., Kruglyakov, M., & Giar dini, D. 2021,
Nature Astronomy, 5, 539
Barnes, J. W. & O’Brien, D. P . 2002, The Astrophysical Journa l, 575, 1087
Batygin, K., Morbidelli, A., & Tsiganis, K. 2011, Astronomy and Astrophysics,
533, A7
Boué, G. & Efroimsky, M. 2019, Celestial Mechanics and Dynam ical Astron-
omy, 131, 30
Chandrasekhar, S. 1987, Ellipsoidal ﬁgures of equilibrium
Correia, A. C. M., Laskar, J., Farago, F., & Boué, G. 2011, Cel estial Mechanics
and Dynamical Astronomy, 111, 105
Darwin, G. H. 1880, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
171, 713
Dobos, V ., Charnoz, S., Pál, A., Roque-Bernard, A., & Szabó, G. M. 2021, Pub-
lications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 133, 09 4401
Domingos, R. C., Winter, O. C., & Y okoyama, T. 2006, Monthly N otices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 373, 1227
Efroimsky, M. 2012, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astr onomy, 112, 283
Efroimsky, M. 2015, The Astronomical Journal, 150, 98
Efroimsky, M. & Makarov, V . V . 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 764, 26
Efroimsky, M. & Makarov, V . V . 2022, Universe, 8, 211
Ford, E. B., Kozinsky, B., & Rasio, F. A. 2000, The Astrophysi cal Journal, 535,
385
Gevorgyan, Y . 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 650, A141
Guimarães, A. & V alio, A. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 15 6, 50
Hamilton, D. P . & Burns, J. A. 1992, Icarus, 96, 43
Hord, B. J., Colón, K. D., Kostov, V ., et al. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 162,
263
Hurford, T. A., Asphaug, E., Spitale, J. N., et al. 2016, Jour nal of Geophysical
Research (Planets), 121, 1054
Innanen, K. A., Zheng, J. Q., Mikkola, S., & V altonen, M. J. 19 97, The Astro-
nomical Journal, 113, 1915
Kaula, W. M. 1964, Reviews of Geophysics and Space Physics, 2 , 661
Leinhardt, Z. M., Ogilvie, G. I., Latter, H. N., & Kokubo, E. 2 012, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 424, 1419
Makarov, V . V . 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 810, 12
Makarov, V . V ., Berghea, C. T., & Efroimsky, M. 2018, The Astrophysical Jour-
nal, 857, 142
Murray, C. D. & Dermott, S. F. 1999, Solar System Dynamics (Ca mbridge Uni-
versity Press)
Owens, N., de Mooij, E. J. W., Watson, C. A., & Hooton, M. J. 202 1, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 503, L38
Rambaux, N. & Williams, J. G. 2011, Celestial Mechanics and D ynamical As-
tronomy, 109, 85
Sasaki, T., Barnes, J. W., & O’Brien, D. P . 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 754,
51
Schmitt, J. H. M. M. & Mittag, M. 2020, Astronomische Nachric hten, 341, 497
Tokadjian, A. & Piro, A. L. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 1 60, 194
Tokadjian, A. & Piro, A. L. 2022, The Astrophysical Jopurnal Letters, 929, L2
V alsecchi, G. B., Rickman, H., Morbidelli, A., et al. 2022, A stronomy and As-
trophysics, 667, A91
V eras, D. & Ford, E. B. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 715, 803
V eras, D., Georgakarakos, N., Gänsicke, B. T., & Dobbs-Dixon, I. 2018, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 481, 2180
Walterova, M., Bˇehounková, M., & Efroimsky, M. 2022, Journal of Geophysical
Research. Planets, Submitted, https: //arxiv.org/abs/2301.02476
Article number, page 15 of 15