<<<PAGE 1>>>
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025) Preprint 17 September 2025 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.2
Massive Retrograde Moons May Survive During Different Hot Jupiters’
Migration Scenario
Yangjun Pu,1★ Chenyang Li,1 and Bohang Zhu1
1School of Astronomy and Space Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Searching for exomoons is attempted via Kepler and TESS, but none is confirmed. Theoretically, similar with Jupiter, the gas
giants are possible to generate moons. However, HJs which are considered to form outside and then move close to the star are
thought not easy to sustain the original moons via dynamical effects. In this paper, we assume the HJ to form at 1 AU and
move inward via disk migration or migration due to planet secular coplanar. Then we simulate the dynamics of exomoon-planet
systems during migration, and we want to study the fates of different original moons. We find that both prograde and retrograde
moons could maintain stable after disk migration, although the retained fraction of retrograde moons is 5 times higher than
the prograde moons. Only massive and retrograde moons (greater than 10 Earth masses) might survive around HJs during the
coplanar excitation. Furthermore, 6% of the original Jupiter-like planet can also form free-floating planets after undergoing
coplanar excitation, and most of them retain their moons. Our results focus on the fate of the exomoons and provide a clue on
where to find the moon for future missions.
Key words:Exomoon – Hot Jupiter – Disk Migration – High Eccentricity Migration
1 INTRODUCTION
Exomoons are natural satellites that orbit exoplanets. The discovery
and characterization of exomoons could help us understand their
distinctformationmechanismsincludinggiantimpactsandaccretion
in circumplanetary envelopes [e.g.Canup (2004); Morbidelli et al.
(2012)]. Large exomoons around gas giants might have water on
their surfaces and could be habitable for humanoids [e.g.Williams
etal.(1997);Kaltenegger(2010)].Althoughexomoonsareexpected
to be abundant, their existence remains challenging to observe and
none have been confirmed [Strøm (2024)].
Since exomoons can induce significant variations in the transit
lightcurve,thetransitmethodandTTV(transittimingvariations)are
theprimarytechniquestodetectthem[Kipping(2009),Kippingetal.
(2013)]. Direct imaging, orbital phase variations, and gravitational
microlensing also have the potential to detect exomoons [Agol et al.
(2015), Brahm et al. (2015), Limbach et al. (2023)].
Kippingetal.(2013)conductedacomprehensivesearchforex-
omoons around cold Jupiters, utilizing the Kepler Space Telescope.
However, to date, only two promising candidates have been iden-
tified: Kepler-1625 b-i and Kepler-1708 b-i [Kipping et al. (2022),
Teachey&Kipping(2018)].Theradiiofthesetwoexomoonsare0.5
and 2.6 Earth radii, respectively. These discoveries do not confirm
the widespread existence of massive moons in the universe, since
large moons may be more easily detected through transit observa-
tions. Moreover, some researchers argue that these exomoons do not
actually exist and that the observed signals could be attributable to
★ E-mail: 221840318@smail.nju.edu.cn
planetaryringsorperturbationsfromotherplanets[Heller&Hippke
(2024)].
In addition to the observed cold Jupiters, exomoons orbiting
hot Jupiters have also been extensively investigated. Planets with
masses greater than 0.25 Jupiter masses and orbital periods of less
than10daysaretypicallyclassifiedashotJupiters[Dawson&John-
son (2018)]. Previous theoretical studies have suggested that hot
Jupiters are unlikely to retain satellites. For these hot Jupiters, from
the perspective of tidal interactions, the tidal equilibrium point of
the star–planet–satellite system either does not exist or lies beyond
the stable Hill sphere [Adams & Bloch (2016)]. When considering
magnetic fields, moons around hot Jupiters tend to lie within the
corotationradiusandareexpectedtoeventuallyspiralinward,cross-
ingtheplanetaryRochelimitonaMyrtimescale[Wei&Lin(2024)].
Overall, moons orbiting hot Jupiters lack long-term stability.
Existing theories suggest that hot Jupiters achieve their current
orbits through two primary mechanisms, disk migration or high-
eccentricity migration [Dawson & Johnson (2018)]. In the disk mi-
gration model, a massive planet exchanges angular momentum with
thesurroundinggasandopensagapintheprotoplanetarydisk.Asa
result, it experiences inward Lindblad torques, causing it to migrate
from an initial orbit of 1–5 AU to within 0.1 AU before the disk
dissipates [Goldreich & Tremaine (1980), Lin & Papaloizou (1986),
Baruteau et al. (2014)]. In the high-eccentricity migration scenario,
giant planets undergo eccentricity excitation through mechanisms
such as the Lidov-Kozai mechanism, planet-planet scattering, secu-
larchaos,andcoplanarinteractions[Kozai(1962),Kozai(1962),Ida
& Lin (2004), Laskar (1989),Petrovich (2015)]. Subsequently, the
planet transfers orbital energy to the star through tidal dissipation at
©2025 The Authors
arXiv:2509.13263v1  [astro-ph.EP]  16 Sep 2025

<<<PAGE 2>>>
2Pu et al.
periastron, ultimately circularizing its orbit and transforming into a
hot Jupiter [Eggleton et al. (1998)].
From the perspective of different hot Jupiters formation pro-
cesses, Namouni (2010) found that the timescale for the tidal effects
ofplanetarytidesonsatelliteorbitsismuchlongerthanthetimescale
fordiskmigration.Therefore,aplanetislikelytobecomehotJupiter
wellbeforeitsmoonmigratesinsidethefinalHillSpherebecauseof
stellar tides. For satellites in close orbits, Barnes & O’Brien (2002)
investigated the orbital stability of satellites around hot Jupiters, and
argued that low-mass, hard-to-detect satellites are more stable than
high-masssatellites.However,otherresearchersusingdifferenttidal
modelshavereachedtheoppositeconclusion,suggestingthatEarth-
masssatellitesincloseorbitscouldremainstableoverGyrtimescales
[Cassidy et al. (2009)].
In the high-eccentricity migration mechanism, the process of
eccentricity excitation is likely to lead to the destabilization of satel-
lites. For the planet-planet scattering mechanism, it is generally a
destructive process for the planet-satellite system, and the resulting
hot Jupiters are almost incapable of retaining moons [Gong et al.
(2013)]. In terms of the distribution of satellite semi-major axes,
satellites with semi-major axes greater than 0.1 times the Hill ra-
dius are systematically removed from the system, while satellites
with semi-major axes smaller than 0.04 times the Hill radius have a
survival rate of 20-40% [Hong et al. (2018)]. For the Lidov-Kozai
mechanism, Trani et al. (2020) found that satellites cannot survive
eccentricity excitation, but there is a 1-6%chance of becoming sta-
ble planets. Specifically, for Neptune-mass satellites, there is a 10%
chance of suppressing eccentricity excitation.
Although a series of previous research have suggested that hot
Jupiters might not retain exomoons, their methodologies often con-
tain significant flaws. On one hand, some papers focused on exo-
moons stability when hot Jupiter have resided under tides, magnetic
field, concluding that they may not survive after 1 Gyr; However,
many projects concentrated young clusters, where exomoons orbit-
ing gas giants are too young to become unstable. On the other hand,
otherresearchexaminingthestabilityofexomoonsduringmigration
processes—such as disk migration and high-eccentricity migration
oftenoverlookretrogrademoons,whichhavebeenshowntobemore
stable than their prograde counterparts. Furthermore, the different
patternsofeccentricityexcitationcandramaticallyinfluencethefate
ofbothplanetsandmoons.Thecoplanarmechanism,forinstance,of-
tenexcitesplanetswithin0.1Myranddoesnotrequirecloseencoun-
terswithotherplanets.Thisreducesthemagnitudeofthedestructive
processes involved and shortens the excitation timescale compared
to secular chaos and the Lidov-Kozai mechanism. This study aims
to investigate the stability of exomoons with varying inclinations or
masses during these two migration patterns through the Rebound
Code and IAS15 Integrator [Rein & Liu (2012); Rein & Spiegel
(2015)]. Special attention is given to the fate of massive retrograde
moons, as they are more likely to survive and be observed.
The following sections are organized as follows: Part II de-
scribes the methods and models used to study planetary migration,
Part III presents the simulation results, Part IV discusses moon for-
mation before planetary migration and compares our results with
other studies, Finally, Part V summarizes the study.
2 METHODS
2.1 Disk Migration Model
Planets more massive than Saturn can carve a gap in the disk. The
giant planet becomes trapped in the annular gap, as both the inner
and outer parts of the protoplanetary disk exert forces that keep it
away and the total torques cause it to migrate inward with the disk.
The process is known as disk migration and its timescale is of the
same order as the viscous accretion timescale [Lin & Papaloizou
(1986),Baruteau et al. (2014)]. Meanwhile, stellar tides can drive
planetsoutward,whichresultsintheslowingandstagnationofplan-
etarymigration[Heller(2019)].Thetheorycreatesatidalmigration
barrier and can explain the concentration of hot Jupiters at∼0.04
AU [Irwin et al. (2008),Schneider et al. (2011)].
SeveralviscousevolutiondiskmodelsincorporatingMHDhave
beenproposedtoaddresstherelationshipof𝑀 acc∝𝑀 𝛼
★𝑡𝛽;However,
there are ongoing debates whether a single power law is preferable
to a double power law [Almendros-Abad et al. (2024)]. Moreover,
although most studies set𝛼to 1,𝛼is only restricted to lie between
0.7 and 1.5 [Lodato et al. (2017),Somigliana et al. (2022)]. The
dispersion of mass-accretion rates is generally high, even for disks
older than 5 Myr, which presents another challenge [Manara et al.
(2020),Somigliana et al. (2024)].
In contrast, we select a model based on observations of the
Orion Nebula by Manara et al. (2012), to evaluate the survival rates
ofmoonsorbitinghotJupiters.Thismodelisapplicabletostarmasses
ranging from red dwarfs to A-type stars, with ages spanning from
0.3 to 10 Myr. The model provides the following:
log[𝑀𝑎𝑐𝑐]=−5.12−0.46 log
 𝑡
yr

−5.75 log
𝑀★
𝑀⊙

+1.17 log
 𝑡
yr

log
𝑀★
𝑀⊙
 (1)
TheplanetmigrationmodelisadaptedfromArmitage’slecture
notes, which provide the following formula[Armitage (2007)]:
d𝑎
d𝑡 = ¤𝑀acc𝑎0.5/(9400𝜋)(2)
Our stellar tide model chooses a time-dependent tidal dissipa-
tionformulasummarizedbyHeller(formula7∼17)by:[Hut(1981),
Eggleton et al. (1998), Hansen (2010), Heller (2019)].
d𝑎=−𝑎
∑︁
𝑖=★,p
1
𝑇𝑖
𝑓1(𝑒)
𝛽15 − 𝑓2(𝑒)
𝛽12
Ω𝑖
𝑛

d𝑡 (3)
Exomoonsorbitinggasgiantscouldmigrateinwardoroutward
during planets’ migration. The timescale of Type-II migration is
shorterthanthatforthetidalevolutionofmoonorbits.Therefore,the
semi-majoraxisofthemoonremainsnearlystationaryduringthedisk
migration, eventually leading to exomoons’ collision with the planet
oritsescapefromthesystem[Namouni(2010)]whenthemoon’sor-
bitexceedsHill’sSphere.Althoughanabruptchangeintheplanetary
radius and rotation could push moons outward, mitigating the likeli-
hood of them being disrupted by the planet [Alvarado-Montes et al.
(2017)], planets undergoing disk migration typically do not experi-
ence this scenario because of the steady disk conditions. Moreover,
Glanz et al. (2022) claimed that gas giants cool and contract slowly,
thusmakingasuddenchangeintheplanetaryradiushighlyunlikely.
We also consider the formula proposed by Alvarado-Montes et al.
(2017) in our tests, and the results demonstrate that the tidal effects
on moons are negligible in the disk migration scenario. As such, we
donotaccountforanytidalforcesactingonmoonsinoursimulation.
Additionally, we examine the contraction and reinflation of hot
Jupiters during the disk migration. Gas giants after runaway gas
accretionmayhaveradiiupto100𝑅 𝐽 inthefirst10000years,followed
by a rapid contracting phase to 3𝑅𝐽 lasting10 6 years[Ginzburg &
Chiang(2019)].Thefinalcontractingphasecanbeslow,extending1
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters3
Gyr,whilehotJupitersaresensitivetoa10%changeinradiationand
canundergoarapidreinflationprocess[Thorngrenetal.(2021)].Not
only does a planet’s radius affect its migration rate, but its relatively
large radius also compresses the region where moons can form and
reduces the area of the stable region.
We employ a thermal model concerning effective tempera-
ture, core temperature, radius, radiation and emission developed by
[Rozneretal.(2022)],themodelforhotJupiterinflationisasfollows:
𝑑𝑅𝑝
𝑑𝑡 ∝ 5𝛾−6
3𝛾−4
𝑅2𝑝
𝐺𝑀 2𝑝
(𝐿ext−𝐿 cool)
𝑑𝑇𝑐
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑚𝑝
𝑀𝑝𝑘𝐵(𝐿ext−𝐿 cool)
(4)
2.2 High-eccentricity Migration Model
Inthehigh-eccentricitymigrationscenario,thegasgiant’seccentric-
ityisexcitedbyvariousmechanisms,afterwhichitundergoesorbital
circulationanddecaythroughtidaldissipation.Herewefocussolely
on the excitation by planet secular coplanar cases, where the inner
planetmayevolveintoanon-inclinedhotJupiterunderthefollowing
conditions [Petrovich (2015)]:
𝑒1≤0.1,𝑒 2≥0.67,𝑚 1/𝑚2(𝑎1/𝑎2)1/2≤0.3(5)
We adopt only dynamic tidal models. Considering a time-
averaged evolution of orbital parameters in equilibrium tides cases,
when the planet’s rotation and orbit are pseudo-synchronized,
the changes in the planet’s semi-major axis and eccentricity can
be given[Hut (1981), Hamers & Tremaine (2017),Glanz et al.
(2022),Rozner et al. (2022)], where𝜏=0.66,𝑘𝐴𝑀 =0.25
𝑑𝑎
𝑑𝑡 𝑑𝑦𝑛 =−21𝑘 AM𝑛2𝜏𝑝
𝑀★
𝑀𝑝
𝑅𝑝
𝑎
 5
𝑎 1
(1−𝑒)21/2
𝑑𝑒
𝑑𝑡 𝑑𝑦𝑛 =− 21
2 𝑘AM𝑛2𝜏𝑝
𝑀★
𝑀𝑝
𝑅𝑝
𝑎
 5 (1−𝑒 2)
𝑒(1−𝑒)21/2
(6)
We do not consider equilibrium tides for several reasons. First,
dynamical tides are significantly stronger than equilibrium tides for
an extremely eccentric orbit (a=1, e=0.97). Gas giants could ex-
perience orbital decay of greater than 0.0001 AU each year under
dynamical tides, while planets undergoing merely equilibrium tides
experienceorbitalchangessmallerthan10 −9 AUeachyear,whichis
even less than the perturbation raised by the outer planet. Therefore,
fortheinnerplanettobecomeahotJupiterundertheequilibriumtide
scenario, its eccentricity usually needs to be excited to above 0.988.
ThisprocessoftenresultsintheplanetfallinginsidetheRocheradius
of the star or escaping from the system, even if the two planets are
not completely coplanar. The slow migration rate in this case also
significantly increases simulation time.
Second, although two tidal models are apparently similar dur-
ing low-eccentricity stages, we concentrate on the final phase of
excitation and migration process. The initial period of the simula-
tion is relatively inconsequential to the results, so the substitution of
dynamical tides is unimportant.
We also do not consider changes in the radius of hot Jupiters
duringhigh-eccentricitymigration.Sinceeccentricityexcitationmay
occur much later than disk dissipation, planets could contract suffi-
ciently.EventhoughplanetsreinflatewhentheybecomehotJupiters,
their radius hardly exceeds 2𝑅𝐽, and we place those moons at least
0.001 AU from the planets. Therefore, the variation of the planetary
radius could be neglected in this scenario.
Figure 1.The evolution of hot Jupiter’s semi-major axisaduring Disk mi-
gration.
3 RESULTS
3.1 Disk Migration
3.1.1 Formation of Hot Jupiter through Disk Migration
In the disk migration scenario, we begin each simulation with a
Jupiter-mass planet located at 1 AU, and assume the stellar age is
uniformly distributed between 0.3 and 3 Myr. The initial planetary
radius is 2𝑅𝐽. We terminate the simulation once the hot Jupiter
reachesitsfinalpositionandcompletes10,000orbitsaroundthestar.
Inourprocedure,therealoneyearisequivalentto100years,andthe
migration rate is correspondingly scaled. Therefore, the simulation
terminates in 8000 Earth years when the migration completes.
Fig. 1 shows the variation in the semi-major axis of the hot
Jupiter during the disk migration. It takes 35000 years for a gas
giant beginning at 1 AU to become a hot Jupiter with a period of
3 days, and once it completes migration, its orbits remain nearly
stagnant. The initial stellar age does not influence the final orbital
elements.Additionally,thetimescaleofmigrationisonlymarginally
influenced.Itcouldbepuzzlingtofindsuchashorttype-IImigration
timescale. This is primarily due to the increased disk torque in the
region close to the star. We also examine the mechanism by placing
the planet initially at 5 AU, where the timescale is found to be 1.5
Myr. As a result, our disk migration models are feasible and could
provide plausible results regarding the stability of exomoons.
3.1.2 Fate of Single Moon through Disk Migration
In our simulation, the mass of moon is uniformly distributed loga-
rithmically between10−12 and10 −4 solar mass, with a density of
5𝑔/𝑐𝑚 3. The initial semi-major axis of prograde moons is scattered
between 0.0275𝑅𝐻 and 0.0475𝑅𝐻, while that of retrograde moons
is scattered between 0.014𝑅𝐻 and 0.055𝑅𝐻 and their eccentricities
are uniformly set to 0.01. The inner boundary ofais close to the
planetary radius, while the outer boundary ofais set to ensure it
reaches the unstable region. As the gas giant migrates inward, its
reduced Hill Sphere will shrink. However, the planet remains puffy
sincethetimescaleofdiskmigrationisinsufficientforittocooldown
and contract. For these highly inflated planets, their radii are even
larger than their Roche limit. In most cases, the hot Jupiter ceases
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 4>>>
4Pu et al.
migration when its semi-major axis reaches 0.043 AU, thus creating
a belt between reduced Hill Sphere and planetary radius, the widths
ofwhichareapproximately10 5 kmand3×10 5 kmforprogradeand
retrograde moons, respectively.
Fig.2showstheevolutionofthesemi-majoraxisofaprograde
moon and a retrograde moon located 170 thousand kilometers away
from the center of hot Jupiter. It can be observed that the moon
generally maintains its initial semi-major axis during the migration
process,butitseccentricitytendstoincreasebecauseofstellargravi-
tationalperturbations.Evenifthesemi-majoraxisofprogrademoons
issmallerthanthereducedHillSphere,theirorbitsareoftendisrupted
oncethegasgiantbecomesahotJupiter.Theincreasingeccentricity
may push the moon beyond the planet’s gravitational influence or
cause it to sink within the gas giant’s atmospheric envelope. Retro-
grade moons residing in the stable belt usually survive because of
the wider belt and more stable configuration. Even if itsais close
to the planetary radius, its eccentricity will not be excited, and the
moon will not be torn apart.
We simulated 3000 groups of gas giant disk migration with a
prograde moon or a retrograde moon, respectively, and plotted the
relationship between satellite survival rate and its mass or initial
semi-major axis in Fig. 3. It is evident that retrograde moons orbit-
ing hot Jupiters formed by disk migration have a higher chance of
survival.
For prograde cases, if we define the stable region as the area
where a satellite has more than a 50% chance of survival at the start
ofthesimulation,thewidthofthisregionwillbemerely30,000km.
The inner boundary of the stable zone is approximately 155000 km,
and the outer boundary of the survival region is about 185000 km.
The reduced Hill Sphere for a 1𝑀𝐽 hot Jupiter holding a prograde
moon is 230000 km, exceeding the stable zone. The difference be-
tween reduced Hill Sphere in the Appendix and stable zone can be
attributed to the addition of planetary radius. The simulation of Hill
SphereBoundarytreatstheplanetasapointmass.Indiskmigration
simulation, moons approaching reduced the Hill Sphere boundary
would be perturbed by stellar gravitational force and their eccen-
tricity would be excited. Eventually, they would be disrupted by the
planet before they escape from the gravitational range of a planet.
Fig. 3 also demonstrates that the survival rate is independent
of the moon’s mass (unless its mass exceeds 3𝑀𝐸), which is evident
because the planetary gravitational range is unassociated with the
mass of a third celestial body.
For gas giants born at 5 AU rather than 1 AU, the chance of a
moon’s survival will not increase. Since changes in orbital elements
causedbytidalforcesaremuchweakerthanthedisktorquesexerted
on the planet, the survival rates of the moon are completely reliant
on the original parameters. If we consider that the semi-major axis
ofmoonsislogarithmicallyuniformlydistributedinthecircumplan-
etary disk, the ratio of prograde moons surviving disk migration is
4.89% for a gas giant born at 1 AU and 3.38% for a planet accreting
gas at 5 AU. For retrograde moons, the values are 23.7% and 17.2%
respectively.Moreover,thelargergravitationalrangeofcoldJupiters
mightresultinmoonsdwellingatagreaterdistancefromtheplanet,
and these moons will not survive disk migration.
When it comes to retrograde moons, they seem to have a sig-
nificantly higher chance of survival. The outer boundary exceeds
400,000 km, which is close to the reduced Hill Sphere boundary for
a retrograde body. The survival rate is the same for a moon with
Mimas’s mass or Earth’s mass. Although the chance of survival de-
creases for a mini-Neptune-mass moon, it may still survive if it is
close enough to the planet.
3.1.3 Fate of Multiple Moons through Disk Migration
GiventhatintheSolarSystem,JupiterhasfourlargeGalileanmoons
and Saturn has six medium-sized icy moons and one large moon,
Titan, it is necessary to investigate the planetary systems holding
multiple moons in the beginning of simulation. We simulated 1,200
casesofdiskmigrationwithmultipleprogradeorretrogrademoons.
In each simulation, the system incorporates 3 moons with the same
massandsimilarinclination.Thedistributionofthesemi-majoraxis
of the innermost moon is the same as the simulation of a single
moon, and the moon is separated by80∼200𝑅 𝐻 (prograde) or
40∼120𝑅 𝐻 (retrograde).Thiscriterionnotonlyensuresmoonsare
stable at the beginning, but also guarantees that the circumplanetary
diskcanprovidesufficientmaterialstosustainthegrowthofmoons.
The other parameters are the same as the disk migration procedure
for single-moon cases.
Fig. 4 shows the relationship between the survival rate of the
moons and their mass or initial semi-major axis. Here, we only con-
sider whether the system could retain one of the three moons and
we do not distinguish whether one moon or three moons survive.
Comparingfig.4withfig.3,weobservethatthesurvivalrateofret-
rograde moons has not shown significant changes. Nevertheless, the
stability of prograde massive moons is reduced, though the width of
thestabilityzoneremainsunchanged.Thiscouldbeexplainedbythe
following procedures. The relatively large distances of the massive
moons cause the outer moons to become unstable before the planet
migrates to become a hot Jupiter. Since the planet’s orbit is continu-
allydamped,thetimescalefromwhenamoonbeginstolosestability
until it either becomes a planet or crashes into the planet’s surface is
relativelyshort.Forretrogrademassivemoons,thisdynamicprocess
willnothaveadevastatingimpactonitsstability.Forprogrademas-
sive moons, even though the inner moon is disrupted shortly, given
itsrelativelynarrowstablezone,anyslightdeviationfromitsoriginal
semi-majoraxisormoderateexcitationofeccentricitycouldresultin
itsdestructioneventually.Therefore,theexistenceofmultiplemoons
would not interfere with the stability of retrograde moons, but the
stability of massive, prograde moons is disturbed.
3.2 Planet Secular Coplanar
3.2.1 Formation of Hot Jupiters through Planet Secular Coplanar
Forhigheccentricitymigrationscenario,weplacedtheinnergasgi-
ant(abouttobecomehotJupiter)nearcircularorbits(𝑒 𝑝,𝑖𝑛 =0.1)at
1AU,andplacedtheouterplanet(theperturbator)ateccentricorbits
(𝑒𝑝,𝑜𝑢𝑡 =0.7)at5AU.Themassesoftheinneronesare1𝑀 𝐽 andfor
the outer ones are5𝑀𝐽, which satisfies equation 5. For inclinations,
since this is "coplanar", we set the inclinations of the two planets
randomlybetween−9◦ to9◦ relativetothereferenceplane.Forother
parameters like true anomaly, longitude of the ascending node and
argumentofperihelion,wesetcompletelyrandomly.Thesimulations
continueuntil theinnerplanet reacheshotJupiter’s location,usually
needs several million years, or the planet might be scattered out of
the system or collides with the star.
Fig. 5 shows the evolution of the inner planet’s orbit. As men-
tioned in section 2.2, during the first 20000 year, the inner planet’s
orbital eccentricity steadily increased until it reached almost 0.99.
Duringthisprocess,thesemimajoraxisoftheinnerplanetremained
unchanged, which means that it lost angular momentum in its inter-
action with outer planets, but its energy remained unchanged. After
the eccentricity is sufficiently excited, the inner planet’s pericenter
became close enough to the star, and during its passing through the
pericenter,theplanetsufferedextremelystrongtidalinteractionswith
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters5
Figure 2.The evolution of prograde moon’s semi-major axis (left) and retrograde moon’s semi-major axis (right) during Disk migration process. The blue line
shows the changes of semi-major axis and the shallow blue region around shows the distance ranges from the center. The green line exhibits the reduced Hill
Sphere, the orange line means planetary radius and the red line is the Roche sphere of planet. The green region is the theoretically stable gap between reduced
Hill Sphere and planetary radius.
Figure3.Therelationshipbetweenthesurvivalrateofaprogrademoon(left)andaretrogrademoon(right)goingthroughDiskmigrationanditsmassorinitial
semi-majoraxis.ThemoonsinaeroregionhaveahigherchancetosurviveandmoonsingoldenregionmightnotsurviveinDiskmigration.Theredlinemarks
the reduced Hill Sphere of the hot Jupiter. The purple cross in each line is the fitted stability boundary for each moons’ mass scope.
thestar,namely,dynamicaltidesbegantotakeeffectsothattheorbit
began to damp. Because the orbital decay rate is extremely sensitive
to the orbital eccentricity, we can notice that after 40,000 years of
star formation, as the eccentricity has dropped below 0.9, the orbital
decayrateslowsdownsignificantly,andtheentiremigrationprocess
is prolonged to millions of years. Although orbital circularization
takes a long time, it is worth noting that the main process of semi-
majoraxisdecayonlytakestensofthousandsofyears,witharateas
high as 0.0001AU per year, which indicates planet secular coplanar
is a highly efficient way to form Hot Jupiters, and furtherly imply
that this model is suitable to consider exomoon stability around Hot
Jupiters.
3.2.2 Fate of Moons Around Hot Jupiters Originated from Planet
Secular Coplanar
Basedonthenumericalsimulationcodebuiltupinsection3.2.1,we
add an extra moon to each of the system to examine their stability
during the migration process. The parameters are listed as follows:
for masses, we set Logarithmic randomly between2×10 18𝑘𝑔to
2×10 26𝑘𝑔; for semimajor axis, we set randomly between0.03𝑅𝐻
and0.11𝑅 𝐻; the initial eccentricity is 0.1; for inclinations, we did
the same to the two planets, so as well true anomaly, longitude of
the ascending node and argument of perihelion. We designed 1011
systems for prograde scenario and 1016 for retrograde. The simula-
tions would end as soon as the inner planet’s orbital configuration
becomes that of a hot Jupiter or whether any of the bodies in the
system is ejected or collides with other bodies.
We have made statistics on the fates of planets and satellites.
The fate of moons are listed in Table 1. It can be seen that almost
all the moons became unstable during the planet migration. Only 3
outof2027moonssurvived,allofwhichareretrogradelargemoons
and their parent planet succceeded to become a hot Jupiter.
For prograde moons, none of them stay stable if their planet
became hot Jupiter. This is likely due to the fact that Hill sphere
would be relatively smaller for prograde bodies, as shown in eq. A2,
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 6>>>
6Pu et al.
Figure 4.The relationship between the survival rate of multiple prograde moons (left) and multiple retrograde moons (right) going through Disk migration and
its mass or initial semi-major axis. The moons in aero region have a higher chance to survive and moons in golden region might not survive in Disk migration.
The red line marks the reduced Hill Sphere of the hot Jupiter. The purple cross in each line is the fitted stability boundary for each moons’ mass scope.
Prograde Moons Retrograde Moons
Large Moons Small Moons Large Moons Small Moons
Hot Jupiter + Stable Moon 0.00% 0.00% 0.57% 0.00%
Hot Jupiter + Moon Collided on Star 22.45% 23.29% 14.69% 16.18%
Hot Jupiter + Moon Collided on Planet 37.92% 42.95% 59.43% 59.45%
Hot Jupiter + Moon Escaped 26.04% 20.51% 14.31% 11.13%
Hot Jupiter + Moon Become Planet 2.06% 1.28% 3.03% 1.98%
Escape Jupiter + Stable Moon 2.45% 3.29% 3.95% 3.99%
Escape Jupiter + Moon Collided on Star 0.75% 0.43% 0.19% 0.24%
Escape Jupiter + Moon Collided on Planet 1.89% 1.05% 1.97% 1.47%
Escape Jupiter + Moon Escaped 0.94% 1.26% 0.75% 0.42%
Escape Jupiter + Moon Become Planet 0.75% 0.21% 0.19% 0.28%
Normal Jupiter 4.72% 6.62% 4.90% 3.99%
Table 1.Statistics on the proportion of planets and satellites with different fates. "Small moon" represents those moons have a mass less than2×1022𝑘𝑔and
"large moon" represents those above.
Prograde Moons Retrograde Moons Reference (No Moons)
Large Moons Small Moons Large Moons Small Moons
Hot Jupiter 88.49% 88.03% 89.45% 89.50% 90.41%
Warm Jupiter 4.72% 6.62% 4.90% 3.99% 3.91%
Escape Jupiter 6.79% 5.34% 5.65% 6.51% 4.50%
Planet Collided on Star 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.39%
Table 2.Statistics of planetary fates under different satellite configurations. "Small moon" represents those moons have a mass less than2×1022𝑘𝑔and "large
moon" represents those above.
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters7
Figure 5.The semimajor-axis, eccentricity and inclination evolution of a
hot Jupiter, whose satellite stays stable during the process. Magenta dots:
semimajor axis evolution of the planet, black dots: eccentricity evolution of
the planet, blue dots: inclination evolution of the planet
Hill sphere of prograde bodies is about half compared to retrograde
ones, meaning a much narrower stability gap for moons to survive.
While for retrograde moons, as mentioned above, there exists
stableonesaroundhotJupiters,whichonlyaccountsforatinyfraction
ofallthesystems.Interestingly,asshowninTable1,wefoundmany
stablemoonsaroundplanetsthatescapedfromthesystem,namely,in
these cases, a whole planet-moon system is ejected from the system
as an integral. More surprisingly, these systems account for about
2%to4%, which means a relatively considerable number of moons
withthisinterestingconfiguration.Thismayindicatesthatsomefree-
floating planets may could have a companion moon orbiting around
them. Since this result for free-floating planets is counterintuitive,
we made further work, which is illustrated in Section 3.2.4.
For planets becoming hot Jupiters, we made a plot that shows
a statistic of their moons with different fates; see Fig. 6. In these 2
panels, the moons on the left-hand side tend to be magenta squares,
meaning moons close to hot Jupiters are easily to crash onto the
planet. On the other hand, moons on the right-hand side are easily
to escape from the Hill sphere and then crash onto the star or be
scattered out of the solar system. It is worth to emphasize that the
only 3 stable moons around hot Jupiters settle in the left top of the
right panel, which gives us the opportunity to suspect that if a moon
orbitingahotJupiterwantstostaystable,itneeds:aretrogradeorbit,
arelativehighmass(largerthanatleast0.01𝑀 𝐽)andaclose-inorbit.
This conjecture will be further verified in Section 3.2.3.
Other information is contained in Table 1. Most of the moons
around hot Jupiters eventually collided onto the planet, followed by
moons collided on star and escaped from the solar system. After
moons are peeled off from the planet, since its orbit around the star
is very close to the planet, it could be easily scattered either to the
star or out of the system. This could also explain why there are few
moons became stable planet after escaping from the planet.
3.2.3 Verifying Stable Moons Hypothesis: Massive Retrograde
Close-in Moons
In the primary results of Section 3.2.2, we found that there are 3
stable moons survived the process that their host planets turning
to hot Jupiters, whose features are: relative massive, close-in orbit,
retrograde orbit. Due to the fact that within the parameter space that
satisfiestheabovecharacteristics,thedatapointsarerelativelysparse
and the statistical samples are too small, it is difficult to verify the
correctness of the above conjecture. To verify this conjecture, we
enlarged the upper left and lower left corners of the parameter space
in fig. 6 and scattered more parameter points in these areas for a
densersimulation,andweonlyconsiderretrogrademoonsthistime.
We set the semi-major axis between1.9𝑅𝐽 to3.1𝑅 𝐽, and set the
mass of moons between10−9𝑀𝐽 to10−8𝑀𝐽 for small moons and
10−2𝑀𝐽 to10−1𝑀𝐽 for large moons. The reason for choosing such
a parameter space is as follows: First, according to the eq. A2, the
Hill sphere radius of a retrograde moon is larger, and theoretically,
it is easier to stabilize. Secondly, in the previous simulations, not a
singlestablesampleoftheprogrademoonsemerged,whichforcedus
to abandon the prograde moons and instead consider the retrograde
ones. Thirdly, it is intuitive that closer satellites are more likely to
stabilize. Therefore, this time we only consider satellites at a short
distance,andthusonlytakeintoaccounttheimpactofsatellitemass
on stability.
Theresultsareplottedinfig.8.Itisobviousthattherearemore
and denser stable satellites in the panel on the right. This also en-
ablesustodrawtheconclusionwithconfidencethatinretrogradeand
close-inorbits,itismucheasierforlargemoonstoremainstablethan
forsmallones.Wemadestatisticsofallsimulated1466systems.We
found that for small moons, 6 out of 637 systems, namely 0.0094%
of the total, have a stable moon around a hot Jupiter. While for large
moons, 131 out of 829 systems, namely 15.8% of the total, have
stable a stable moon around a hot Jupiter. Obviously, the previous
hypothesis has been successfully verified: a retrograde large moon
withmasslargerthanasuperearth(over0.01𝑀 𝐽),andaclose-inorbit
between about2𝑅𝐽 to3𝑅 𝐽, could have a relative considerable pos-
sibility (∼16%) to survive the chaotic process of high-eccentricity
migration of a Jovian planet in planet secular coplanar model.
Toexplainwhythisisthecase,wesubsequentlyinvestigatedthe
relationbetweenthefinalsemi-majoraxisofthehotJupitersandthe
massofmoons,seeinfig.9.Althoughthereexistsnosignificantrule
on the left panel, it can be seen that in the right panel, the massive
stablemoonstendtoraiseupthefinalsemi-majoraxisofhotJupiters,
and this is the explanation: a massive moon somehow sometimes
pulls up the final semi-major axis of the planet, leading to a larger
Hill Sphere according to eq.A2, causing it has more opportunity to
stay within the stable range and prevent itself from the perturbation
of the star.
A possible explanation for this "raise-up" could be associated
with the inhibition of eccentricity excitation by large moons. Eq.6
showsthatthetidaldissipationbecomesprominentwheneccentricity
is greater than 0.97, where da reaches 0.001 AU / year. Since a
massive moon could prolong the time of eccentricity excitation (see
section4.1), when the eccentricity of inner planets without massive
moons increases to 0.975, those hosting a large moon will only have
𝑒=0.9725. However, gas giants with𝑒∼0.9725undergo damping
of the semi-major axis at a rate of 0.003 AU / year, which could
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 8>>>
8Pu et al.
Figure6.PlotofmoonswithdifferentinitialsemimajoraxisanddifferentmassaroundgasgiantsthatbecamehotJupiters.Theleftpanelisforprogrademoons
and the right one is for retrograde. Orange circle: normal stable moons, blue triangle: moons collided with star, magenta square: moons collided with planet,
green rhombus: moons escaped from the solar system; purple pentagon: moons become planet.
Figure 7.Orbital evolution of one of the stable moons around planets that
become hot Jupiter. Green dots: Planet’s Hill Sphere Radius, Green region:
Stability gap between Roche limit and Hill Sphere of the planet, blue dots:
exomoon’s semi-major axis, blue region: exomoon’s range of distances from
thecenter,redline:hotJupiter’sRochelimit,orangeline:hotJupiter’satmo-
sphere boundary.
accumulate in 100 years and result in decoupling with the outer
planet. Therefore, gas giants with massive moons generally have
larger perihelion than those with small moons, and their final semi-
major axis is larger, providing more space for moons to be stable.
3.2.4 Free-floating Planets from Coplanar Mechanism and
Stability of Their Moons
In Section. 3.2.2, we mentioned that some high-e-migration-
producedfree-floatingplanetscouldretainastablemoonwhilebeing
scattered out of the system, which is kind of counterintuitive. In this
part, we would made further research on this issue.
We made another 2047 simulations whose conditions are same
tothoseinSection3.2.2.Wecollectedtheshortestdistancebetween
the inner planet and the other outer planet of the systems in which
the inner planet became free-floating planet before the inner planet
was ultimately scattered out of the system ("Minimum distance"
since here). And we study the relationship between these minimum
distances and the ultimate fate of these planets’ moons.
Among these systems, there are few free-floating planets. For
prograde scenario we get 53 out of 1023 systems and for retrograde
wegot54outof1024.Wemadeaplotshowstherelationbetweenthe
minimumdistanceandfateofmoons,seeinfig.10.Itisnotdifficult
tonoticefromtheleft2panelsthatifamoonisstable,theminimum
distance tends be larger, and for other scenarios that are unstable,
like collision or escape, the minimum distance tends be smaller. It
can also be seen in the right 2 panels that the escapers tends to have
a larger initial semimajor-axis and a smaller minimum distance. For
stable ones, they tend to have a smaller initial semimajor-axis and
a larger minimum distance while collided ones, they tend to have
a smaller initial semimajor-axis and a smaller minimum distance,
though the difference between the minimum distance of stable ones
and collided ones are not very obvious.
These results are reasonable since if the minimum distance is
large, the inner planet’s moon won’t suffer significant perturbation
fromthe outerplanet, thusleadingto theresult thatitcould bemore
probabletobestable.Ifthisdistanceissmall,theperturbationwould
beintenseandmoonswouldbemoreeasiertobepeeledofthesystem
or its eccentricity would be excited so that it will crash onto the host
planet.
4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Moon Shielding Effect in Coplanar Excitation
Trani et al. (2020) found that in 10% of the systems, a Neptune-
sized moon could prevent the planet from perturbation by the sec-
ondarystarintheVonZeipel-Lidov-Kozai(ZLK)mechanism[Kozai
(1962),Lidov(1962)].Theshieldingeffectcanbeestimatedbycom-
paring the quadrupole ZLK timescale𝑇𝑍𝐿𝐾 of the inner (the moon-
planet-star system) and outer (planet-star-perturber) triple systems
[Hamerset al.(2015)].The oscillationsintheplanetary orbitscould
be alleviated when the inner ZLK timescale is much shorter than
the outer timescale. Trani claimed a stronger shielding effect in the
coplanarexcitationscenariobecausetheouterZLKtimescaleismuch
longerthantheinnerone,andtheshieldingconditionisdescribedin
[Antognini (2015),Trani et al. (2020)].
𝑇ZLK,inn
𝑇ZLK,out
=

𝑎3
1
𝑎𝑚𝑎2
2
 3/2  𝑚moon+𝑚planet
𝑚moon+𝑚planet+𝑚star
 1/2
· 𝑚2
𝑚star

1−𝑒 2
1
1−𝑒 2
2
 3/2
≪1
𝜖oct= 𝑎1
𝑎2
𝑒2
1−𝑒 2
2𝑇ZLK,inn
𝑇ZLK,out
√𝜖oct≪1
(7)
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters9
Figure 8.Additional plot of moons with different small semimajor axis and low (10−9𝑀𝐽 to10−8𝑀𝐽) or high (10−2𝑀𝐽 to10−1𝑀𝐽) mass around gas giants
thatbecamehotJupiters.Theleftpanelisforsmallmoonsandtherightoneisforlargeones.Orangecircle:normalstablemoons,bluetriangle:moonscollided
with star, magenta square: moons collided with planet, green rhombus: moons escaped from the solar system; purple pentagon: moons become planet.
Figure9.PlotoftherelationshipfinalsemimajoraxisofthehotJupitersandmassofmoons.Theleftpanelareforsmallmoonsandtherightpanelareforlarge
ones. Blue: stable moons, green: moons collided on planets, orange: moons escaped from the system, purple: moons escaped from planet but remained in the
system.
In our results, in the absence of satellites, the eccentricity of
the planet has a 3.9% probability of remaining uninfluenced due to
the orbital configuration. When prograde or retrograde moons are
added, the chance of not being excited is 5.6% and 4.6%, which
are statistically insignificant. This could be attributed to different
moon masses, as only Neptune-sized moons exhibit the shielding
effect, while super-Earth-sized moons do not [Trani et al. (2020)],
butoursimulationsincorporateveryfewNeptune-sizedmoons(less
than 6%). Therefore, we conducted another simulation considering
onlyNeptune-sizedmoons.Wefindthatcloseprogrademoonshavea
12.8%chanceofpreventingtheplanetsfromperturbation,anddistant
moons have a 14.7% chance of shielding its host from disruption.
Fig.11presentsthecumulativedistributionfunctionoftheexci-
tation time (e≥0.95) of different moons. It is evident that terrestrial
moons in a coplanar scenario cannot extend the timescale of eccen-
tricityexcitation.Theeffectofclosemassivemoonsonthetimescale
is also negligible. By contrast, not only could distant Neptune-sized
moonspreventtheplanetsfromeccentricityexcitation,buttheycould
also prolong the excitation timescale. These results are remarkable,
but not as striking as Trani’s prediction, which can be explained as
follows: In Trani’s setup, the ratio of the inner ZLK timescale to the
outer timescale is approximately10−8, whereas in our simulation,
the value is 0.06. Even if we set the semi-major axis of the moon as
1.5 million kilometers, the value is 1/1000, much larger than Trani’s
results.Moreover,consideringthattheaveragedurationofeccentric-
ity excitation in a coplanar scenario is less than 50 thousand years,
much shorter than the Lidov-Kozai and secular chaos mechanisms,
the inability of moon shielding to prevent excitation is understand-
able.
If the outer planets’ semi-major axes were raised to 15 AU,
the orbital elements would still conform to the criterion of coplanar
excitation. Furthermore, the eccentricity excitation timescale would
be greatly extended, and the octuple moment would also be larger,
where the moon shielding could be more significant. However, this
would result in an excessively long simulation time.
4.2 Comparison with Hot Jupiters produced by Other
mechanisms
Wehaveshownthatcoplanarexcitation-higheccentricitymigration
is an efficient method to produce hot Jupiters with low inclination.
The eccentricity of the inner gas giant could be excited to approxi-
mately0.97inlessthan100,000years,followedbyarapidmigration
lasting 10,000 years. The damping of the eccentricity occurs more
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 10>>>
10Pu et al.
Figure 10.Statistics of the relationship between the minimum distance and fate of moons. The upper 2 panels are for prograde moons and the lower 2 are for
retrograde. Blue: stable moons, green: moons collided on planets, orange: moons escaped from the system, purple: moons escaped from planet but remained in
the system.
Figure11.Thecumulativedistributionfunctionofexcitationtimeofdifferent
moons. Blue line: control group (no moon), orange line: retrograde Super-
Earth-sized(1∼10𝑀 𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑡ℎ )moons,greenline:progradeSuper-Earth-sized
(1∼10𝑀 𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑡ℎ )moons,redline:closeNeptune-sizedprogrademoons,pur-
ple line: distant Neptune sized prograde moons (a= 1.5 million kilometers).
slowly, but the process is completed within 100 Myr. During the
excitation and migration stage, close-in (0.02𝑅𝐻), massive retro-
grademoonscouldpotentiallysurvive.Herewediscusswhetherhot
Jupiters produced by other mechanisms, such as the Lidov-Kozai
mechanism, planet-planet scattering (PPS), and secular chaos could
also retain their moons, and whether such moons could shield their
hosts from eccentricity excitation.
Tranietal.(2020)investigatedthestabilityofmassive,prograde
moonsundertheLidov-Kozaimechanismandfoundthatnoneofthe
moons survives. However, all of the moons in their simulation were
located 0.01 AU away from the planets, which would obviously not
survive, as 1.5 million kilometers exceeds far beyond the eventual
planetarystabilitysphere.Ifretrograde,closemoonsareconsidered,
hotJupitersundergoingtheLidov-Kozaiexcitationmightalsoretain
theirmoons.Thelikelihoodofretainingtheirmoonsshouldbelower
in our simulation, as the timescale for exciting eccentricity by a
distant stellar companion is longer. Since the perihelion of a gas
giant at a = 1 AU, e = 0.97 is 0.03 AU, but its final semi-major axis
after circularization is 0.06 AU, a slower excitation timescale can
result in longer periods at lower perihelion, thereby weakening the
stability of close moons.
PPSisalsoaneffectivemechanismtoproducehotJupiters,par-
ticularly when there are more than 3 gas giants in the systems [Na-
gasawa et al. (2008); Nagasawa & Ida (2011); Beaugé & Nesvorný
(2012)]. Hong et al. (2018) found that moons beyond 0.1𝑅𝐻 are
systematically destroyed, while moons within 0.04𝑅𝐻 have at least
a 20% to survive. Considering the Galilean moons, if the encounter
distance between Jupiter and another icy planet exceeds 0.03 AU,
the perturbation on the moons could be negligible [Deienno et al.
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters11
(2014)]. Since a close encounter of about 0.05 AU could already
induce significant variations in the orbital elements, moons in close
orbits are highly likely to survive such events and migrate with the
gas giants.
Regarding secular chaos [Laskar (1989, 1997)], the growth of
eccentricity is attributed to the overlap of higher-order resonances
[Wu & Lithwick (2011)]. Theoretically predicting the survival rate
andmoonshieldingeffectsduetomassivemoonsisdifficultbecause
of the complex dynamical processes. Moreover, the efficiency of SC
is slow, which hampers the simulation. When it comes to the E2
mechanisms proposed by Wang et al. (2017), the stability of moons
could be compromised due to the frequent flipping of the planetary
inclination. However, moons in E1 mechanisms may provide a valu-
able opportunity to test the moon shielding effect due to a longer
timescale and a lower ZLK timescale.
4.3 Massive Moon Formation Before Migration
ToproduceobservablesignalsintransitorTTV,exomoonsneedtobe
more massive than the Galilean moons or Mars. In previous results,
we have found that both prograde and retrograde moons could sur-
vive in disk migration, and only close, massive (≥3𝑀𝐸), retrograde
moons might endure. There are three major moon formation mecha-
nisms, including capture, giant impact, and in-situ circumplanetary
disk accretion. Here, we discuss whether these mechanisms could
support a sub-Neptune-mass moon to form or to be captured around
a Jovian planet, and whether moons can form before disk migration.
4.3.1 Massive Moons’ Formation Before High-e Migration
Firstly, we consider the scenario where a super-Earth or a sub-
Neptune is captured by a gas giant, thereby becoming a moon. In
thesolarsystem,Tritonistheonlymajormoononaretrogradeorbit,
and Agnor & Hamilton (2006) claimed that an encounter event of
Neptune and a binary planetary pair consisting of two thousand km-
sized celestial bodies could explain Triton’s peculiar orbit. When it
comestoexomooncandidates,Kepler-1625bmaybeasuperJupiter,
anditmighthaveaNeptune-massmoon[Teachey&Kipping(2018)].
Heller (2018) found that a Neptune-mass object could be captured
by Kepler-1625 b, though the event could eject mass equivalent to a
mini-Neptune.Therefore,formassivehotJupiterssuchasTOI-5261
b [Schulte et al. (2025)], they are capable of seizing a gas dwarf and
might migrate with its massive moon. Typical hot Jupiters may be
unable to capture a sub-Neptune, but they are capable of gaining an
Earth-mass moon before eccentricity excitation.
Secondly, the mechanism underlying the giant impacts is ex-
plored. The Moon is formed through a significant collision between
the proto-Earth and a Mars-sized planet [(e.g. Hartmann & Davis
1975)]. Therefore, it is reasonable to anticipate that a larger planet
could host a more massive moon, with a mass ratio comparable to
the Moon-Earth ratio. The formation of massive moons is primarily
determined by the collision process and the gas content in the disks,
asdifferentmodelsgeneratediskswithvaryingvapormassfractions.
Circumplanetarydiskswithmorevaporhavedifficultyformingmas-
sive moons as vapor exerts a strong drag on moonlets, causing them
to rapidly fall toward the planet’s surface [Nakajima et al. (2022)].
DuringtheformationofMoon,thecanonicalmodelispreferredover
half-Earths model and the multiple impacts model [e.g.Cameron &
Ward (1976),Canup (2012),Rufu et al. (2017)], since the canonical
model produces disks lacking vapor. Unfortunately, rocky planets
larger than 6𝑀𝐸 or icy planets larger than 1𝑀𝐸 generate disks
filledwithvapor,thusimpedingmassivemoonsformingthroughgi-
ant impact [Nakajima et al. (2022)]. Gas dwarfs and gas giants also
face difficulties in producing large moons as their disks incorporate
morehydrogenandheliumgasfromtheirenvelopes[Reinhardtetal.
(2020)]. Therefore, it is difficult to generate massive moons through
the giant impact mechanism.
Finally, we discuss whether in-situ formation in circumplan-
etary disk could support the growth of a massive moon. Different
models have been proposed, including solids enhanced minimum
mass model [Mosqueira & Estrada (2003a),Mosqueira & Estrada
(2003b)], actively supplied gaseous accretion disk model [Canup
& Ward (2002),Canup & Ward (2006)], and tidally spreading disk
model [Canup (2012)]. None of these models predict moons larger
than Mars in the Jovian system (e.g. Ogihara & Ida 2012),Malamud
et al. (2020)]. One reason is that Jupiter-mass planets at 1 AU or
5 AU do not exhibit ice features due to the effects of planetary il-
lumination and viscous heating, which reduces disk solid mass and
decreasesfinalmoonmass.ForsuperJupiterssuchasKepler-1625b,
theirmassivedisksmayormaynotbeabletosustainthegrowthofa
Neptune-sized moon [Moraes & Vieira Neto (2020),Heller (2018)].
However, massive moons in these systems tend to grow at greater
distances from giant planets, outside the snow line, which is at least
15 planetary radii from the planet’s surface [Ogihara & Ida (2012);
Heller&Pudritz(2015)].Therefore,theseplanetscannotpersistdur-
ing the planet migration process. In summary, typical hot Jupiters
can capture an Earth-like planets and super Jupiters can seize a sub-
Neptune. Moons formed by giant impact or in-situ circumplanetary
accretion are not sufficiently massive enough to be observed or they
are too distant to endure the migration.
4.3.2 Early Moon Formation Before Disk Migration
Asshownintheresults,moonsclosetotheplanetcouldsurvivedur-
ing disk migration, independent of their inclination and mass. It is
worthy of discussing whether observable moons could form before
disk migration. In the in-situ accretion scenario, solids enhanced
minimum mass model support that Ganymede could grow from a
1000 km-sized protomoon to its current volume in 10,000 years
[Mosqueira & Estrada (2003b)], but the theory does not consider
dustcoagulationincircumplanetarydisks.Protoplanetarydiskstend
tocircularizetheorbitsofcelestialbodies,reducingtheprobabilities
of close encounters. Moreover, gas giants create a gap and prevent
materials from approaching their gravitational influence. There may
bechancesthatplanetsaccretinggascouldcaptureterrestrialplanets
inthetype-Imigrationprocess,butthistheoryrequiresmoresimula-
tionstosupport.Inanutshell,giantimpactandcaptureeventsrarely
occur before disk migration.
4.4 The long-term orbital evolution of moons around hot
Jupiters
Althoughtidalforcescouldbeneglectedinoursimulation,sincethe
timescalesonwhichtidalforcescansignificantlyaffectmoons’orbits
aremuchlongerthanthoseofdiskmigrationandthoseofeccentric-
ity excitation and planetary orbit decay in the coplanar excitation
mechanism, they must be considered during the long-term orbital
evolution. There is debate over whether massive moons around hot
Jupiters can be stable on a Gyr timescale, but it is certain that tidal
heating and magnetic fields have a crucial effect on close-in moons.
Firstly, considering tidal heating, close moons may experience
significant heating rates, which could significantly evaporate their
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 12>>>
12Pu et al.
atmospheres. Cassidy et al. (2009) found that moons with a thin at-
mospherecouldbeseverelyerodediftheirhosts’orbitalperiodisless
than 6.6 days. For moons with thick envelopes, the limit is 2.4 days.
Inotherwords,thesizeofsuper-Earthscouldbereduced,whichpre-
ventsthemfrombeingobserved.Asformagneticfields,planet-moon
magneticinteractionplaysasignificantroleinthemoons’dynamics,
especially when planetary fields are strong [Strugarek et al. (2017)].
For moons located at 0.04𝑅𝐻, their orbits lie within the corotation
radius and they will fall within the Roche Limit in 3 Myr [Wei &
Lin (2024)]. Icy and silicate moons are more resistant to magnetic
torques. However, icy moons born beyond the snow line should lose
their water content during migration, and their conductivity will el-
evate. Therefore, close-in massive moons are susceptible to tidal
heating and magnetic forces, and they might only be stable around
hot Jupiters that have just completed their track.
Although WASP-12 b shows clear signs of orbital decay and
the timescale is 2.9 Myr [Turner et al. (2021)], most of the hot
Jupiters are dynamically stable and could stay in their orbits for 1
Gyr. This observation suggests that the duration for which massive,
nearmoonsremainstablearoundhotJupitersismuchshorterthanthe
averagelifespanoftheirhosts.Tofindsignsofexomoons,targetsare
preferred to planets in younger systems such as IRAS 04125+2902
b or hot Jupiters with a moderate eccentricity [Barber et al. (2024)],
because these hot Jupiters have just completed their migration and
their moons haven’t had time to become unstable yet.
5 CONCLUSION
Thediscoveryofexomoonscanprovideinsightsintotheirformation
and their evolution with planets. Large, temperate exomoons can be
habitable and host exotic life. However, to date, there have been no
confirmed exomoons, and none of the promising candidates orbit
hot Jupiters. Previous studies indicated that hot Jupiters excited by
planet-planet scatter or the Lidov-Kozai mechanism and followed
high-eccentricity migration could not retain moons [e.g.Gong et al.
(2013); Trani et al. (2020)], while there is ongoing debate about
whether large moons around hot Jupiters through disk migration
exhibit long-term dynamic stability [e.g.Barnes & O’Brien (2002);
Cassidyetal.(2009)].Thisstudyfocusedontheevolutionofmoons
of varying mass and inclination during disk migration and coplanar
excitation – high-eccentricity migration, using new models and an
integrator, because hot Jupiters undergoing these mechanisms have
a large chance of retaining a moon. The findings are as follows:
1.Indiskmigration,progrademoonslocated155000to185000
kilometersawayfromhotJupitersexhibitlong-termdynamicstabil-
ity, which is independent of their mass, while retrograde moons
within the distance of 400000 kilometers remain stable.
2.IfhotJupitersformedviadiskmigrationholdmultiplemoons
initially, the stability of prograde, massive moons is significantly
reduced, but the orbits of retrograde moons are not disrupted.
3. All prograde moons are unable to survive in coplanar exci-
tation - high eccentricity migration, but 1% of massive retrograde
moonsretainandbecomemoonsorbitinghotJupiters.Thesemoons
are close-in moons with masses equivalent to super-Earths or sub-
Neptunes. 20% of moons are torn by stars, and half of them are torn
by planets. 2% moons can become ploonets.
4.Wefoundthatmorethan10%ofNeptune-sizedmoonscould
shield the planets from gravitational perturbation and eccentricity
excitation. The phenomenon was predicted by Trani et al. (2020),
though the rate does not align with the expectation.
5.About6%ofplanetsescapefromthesystemandhalfofthem
retaintheirmoons,offeringopportunitiestodiscovermoonsorbiting
free floating planets.
6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been recognized as a national-level innovation and
entrepreneurship project for undergraduate students, and we appre-
ciate the financial support provided by this project. We appreciate
the suggestions of Jiwei Xie at Nanjing University and Shangfei Liu
at Sun Yat-sen University. We also thank Keting Xin and Qingfeng
Pang at Nanjing University for their assistance with Rebound. This
research made use ofRebound[Rein & Liu (2012)],astropy, a
community-developedcorePythonpackageforAstronomy[Astropy
Collaboration et al. (2013)], as well asNumPyandSciPy[(Van Der
Walt et al. 2011)], andMatplotlib[(Hunter 2007)].
REFERENCES
Adams F. C., Bloch A. M., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 2527
Agnor C. B., Hamilton D. P., 2006, Nature, 441, 192
Agol E., Jansen T., Lacy B., Robinson T. D., Meadows V., 2015, ApJ, 812, 5
Almendros-Abad V., et al., 2024, A&A, 685, A118
Alvarado-Montes J. A., Zuluaga J. I., Sucerquia M., 2017, MNRAS, 471,
3019
Antognini J. M. O., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 3610
Armitage P. J., 2007, arXiv e-prints, pp astro–ph/0701485
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Barber M. G., et al., 2024, Nature, 635, 574
Barnes J. W., O’Brien D. P., 2002, ApJ, 575, 1087
BaruteauC.,etal.,2014,inBeutherH.,KlessenR.S.,DullemondC.P.,Hen-
ningT.,eds,ProtostarsandPlanetsVI.pp667–689(arXiv:1312.4293),
doi:10.2458/azu_uapress_9780816531240-ch029
Beaugé C., Nesvorný D., 2012, ApJ, 751, 119
Brahm R., et al., 2015, AJ, 150, 33
Cameron A. G. W., Ward W. R., 1976, in Lunar and Planetary Science
Conference. p. 120
Canup R. M., 2004, ARA&A, 42, 441
Canup R. M., 2012, Science, 338, 1052
Canup R. M., Ward W. R., 2002, AJ, 124, 3404
Canup R. M., Ward W. R., 2006, Nature, 441, 834
Cassidy T. A., Mendez R., Arras P., Johnson R. E., Skrutskie M. F., 2009,
ApJ, 704, 1341
Cincotta P. M., Simó C., 2000, A&AS, 147, 205
Dawson R. I., Johnson J. A., 2018, ARA&A, 56, 175
Deienno R., Nesvorný D., Vokrouhlický D., Yokoyama T., 2014, AJ, 148, 25
Domingos R. C., Winter O. C., Yokoyama T., 2006, MNRAS, 373, 1227
Eggleton P. P., Kiseleva L. G., Hut P., 1998, ApJ, 499, 853
Gautam A., Bashyal A., Bhattarai S. K., Satyal S., 2022, PASJ, 74, 815
Ginzburg S., Chiang E., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 4334
Glanz H., Rozner M., Perets H. B., Grishin E., 2022, ApJ, 931, 11
Goldreich P., Tremaine S., 1980, ApJ, 241, 425
Gong Y.-X., Zhou J.-L., Xie J.-W., Wu X.-M., 2013, ApJ, 769, L14
Goździewski K., Bois E., Maciejewski A. J., Kiseleva-Eggleton L., 2001,
A&A, 378, 569
Hamers A. S., Tremaine S., 2017, AJ, 154, 272
HamersA.S.,PeretsH.B.,AntoniniF.,PortegiesZwartS.F.,2015,MNRAS,
449, 4221
Hamilton D. P., Krivov A. V., 1997, Icarus, 128, 241
Hansen B. M. S., 2010, ApJ, 723, 285
Hartmann W. K., Davis D. R., 1975, Icarus, 24, 504
Heller R., 2018, A&A, 610, A39
Heller R., 2019, A&A, 628, A42
Heller R., Hippke M., 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 193
Heller R., Pudritz R., 2015, A&A, 578, A19
Hinkel N. R., Kane S. R., 2013, ApJ, 774, 27
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Massive Moons Around Hot Jupiters13
Hong Y.-C., Raymond S. N., Nicholson P. D., Lunine J. I., 2018, ApJ, 852,
85
Hunter R. B., 1967, MNRAS, 136, 245
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90
Hut P., 1981, A&A, 99, 126
Ida S., Lin D. N. C., 2004, ApJ, 604, 388
Irwin J., Hodgkin S., Aigrain S., Bouvier J., Hebb L., Irwin M., Moraux E.,
2008, MNRAS, 384, 675
Kaltenegger L., 2010, ApJ, 712, L125
Kipping D. M., 2009, MNRAS, 392, 181
Kipping D. M., Forgan D., Hartman J., Nesvorný D., Bakos G. Á., Schmitt
A., Buchhave L., 2013, ApJ, 777, 134
Kipping D., et al., 2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 367
Kozai Y., 1962, AJ, 67, 579
Laskar J., 1989, Nature, 338, 237
Laskar J., 1997, A&A, 317, L75
Lidov M. L., 1962, Planet. Space Sci., 9, 719
Limbach M. A., et al., 2023, PASP, 135, 014401
Lin D. N. C., Papaloizou J., 1986, ApJ, 309, 846
LodatoG.,ScardoniC.E.,ManaraC.F.,TestiL.,2017,MNRAS,472,4700
Malamud U., Perets H. B., Schäfer C., Burger C., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 5089
ManaraC.F.,RobbertoM.,DaRioN.,LodatoG.,HillenbrandL.A.,Stassun
K. G., Soderblom D. R., 2012, ApJ, 755, 154
Manara C. F., et al., 2020, A&A, 639, A58
Moraes R. A., Vieira Neto E., 2020, MNRAS, 495, 3763
Morbidelli A., Tsiganis K., Batygin K., Crida A., Gomes R., 2012, Icarus,
219, 737
Mosqueira I., Estrada P. R., 2003a, Icarus, 163, 198
Mosqueira I., Estrada P. R., 2003b, Icarus, 163, 232
Nagasawa M., Ida S., 2011, ApJ, 742, 72
Nagasawa M., Ida S., Bessho T., 2008, ApJ, 678, 498
Nakajima M., Genda H., Asphaug E., Ida S., 2022, Nature Communications,
13, 568
Namouni F., 2010, ApJ, 719, L145
Ogihara M., Ida S., 2012, ApJ, 753, 60
Payne M. J., Deck K. M., Holman M. J., Perets H. B., 2013, ApJ, 775, L44
Petrovich C., 2015, ApJ, 805, 75
Rein H., Liu S. F., 2012, A&A, 537, A128
Rein H., Spiegel D. S., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1424
Reinhardt C., Chau A., Stadel J., Helled R., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 5336
Rozner M., Glanz H., Perets H. B., Grishin E., 2022, ApJ, 931, 10
Rufu R., Aharonson O., Perets H. B., 2017, Nature Geoscience, 10, 89
SchneiderJ.,DedieuC.,LeSidanerP.,SavalleR.,ZolotukhinI.,2011,A&A,
532, A79
Schulte J., et al., 2025, MNRAS,
Somigliana A., Toci C., Rosotti G., Lodato G., Tazzari M., Manara C. F.,
Testi L., Lepri F., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 5927
Somigliana A., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A285
Strøm P. A., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2410.06248
Strugarek A., Bolmont E., Mathis S., Brun A. S., Réville V., Gallet F., Char-
bonnel C., 2017, ApJ, 847, L16
Sucerquia M., Cuello N., 2025, A&A, 694, L8
Teachey A., Kipping D. M., 2018, Science Advances, 4, eaav1784
Thorngren D. P., Fortney J. J., Lopez E. D., Berger T. A., Huber D., 2021,
ApJ, 909, L16
Trani A. A., Hamers A. S., Geller A., Spera M., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 4195
Turner J. D., Ridden-Harper A., Jayawardhana R., 2021, AJ, 161, 72
Van Der Walt S., Colbert S. C., Varoquaux G., 2011, Computing in Science
and Engineering, 13, 22
Wang Y., Zhou J.-l., hui-gen L., Meng Z., 2017, ApJ, 848, 20
Wei X., Lin D. N. C., 2024, ApJ, 965, 88
Williams D. M., Kasting J. F., Wade R. A., 1997, Nature, 385, 234
Wu Y., Lithwick Y., 2011, ApJ, 735, 109
APPENDIX A: STABILITY HILL SPHERE BOUNDARY
SIMULATION
The Hill sphere is a roughly spherical region around a celestial
body, also known as the Roche sphere. For a planet, the Hill sphere
is typically defined as the region where the planet’s gravitational
influence dominates the motion of its satellite (or other orbiting
objects), which could be expressed as:
𝑅𝐻 =𝐴𝑎 𝑝
 1−𝑒 𝑝
  𝑀𝑝
3𝑀∗
 1/3
(A1)
where A is correlated with the moon’s inclination and simulation
procedures.
StudieshavefoundthatsatellitesneartheouteredgeoftheHill
sphere experience long-term orbital instability, with the possibility
of falling into the Roche lobe of the planet or escaping [Hunter
(1967)]. Hamilton and Krivov contended that for prograde moons,
A = 0.53, and for retrograde moons, A = 0.69 [Hamilton & Krivov
(1997)], while Hinkel took A = 0.3 for prograde cases based on
Barnes analysis [Barnes & O’Brien (2002); Hinkel & Kane (2013)].
Domingos reached 0.49 and 0.93, respectively, through simulation
[Domingos et al. (2006)], which was used extensively to define the
stabilityboundariesofexoplanetssuchasHD100777bandWASP-49
Ab [Gautam et al. (2022); Sucerquia & Cuello (2025)].
However,thestableHillSphereformuladerivedintheprevious
workwasobtainedfromnumericalsimulationsofcoldJupiters,thus
the associated constants may not be applicable to the case of hot
Jupiters.Inaddition,thetermsrelatedtotheinclinationarediscrete,
calling for a revised formula concerning the reduced Hill Sphere
reliant on the inclination.
In this study, we used numerical simulations to investigate the
empirical formula for the stable Hill sphere in the region of hot
Jupiters. In order to simulate the stability of a reduced three-body
problem under different parameter spaces, a good quantitative crite-
rionisessentialtodescribethestabilityofasystem.Forthispurpose,
we used the indicator𝑀𝐸𝐺𝑁𝑂(mean exponential growth factor of
nearbyorbits),whichwasusedincelestialmechanicsandnon-linear
dynamics.Itassessedthedegreeofchaosbyaveragingtheexponen-
tial growth of orbital distances, thus quantifying the chaotic nature
oforbitsinthevicinity[Cincotta&Simó(2000);Goździewskietal.
(2001)]. If the𝑀𝐸𝐺𝑁𝑂value is close to 2, the system is almost
periodic, and the orbital perturbations do not grow significantly. If
the𝑀𝐸𝐺𝑁𝑂value is greater than 3, the system exhibits chaotic
behavior, and the distance between the orbits grows exponentially
over time.
We primarily studied the influence of two variables on the sta-
bleregionoftheHillsphere:theplanet’ssemi-majoraxis𝑎,planets’
orbitaleccentricity𝑒andthemoon’sorbitalinclination𝑖.Wefirstset
𝑖to 0 and vary𝑎,𝑒to study the range of the reduced Hill sphere𝑅ℎ.
Afterward, we fixed𝑎,𝑒and examined the effects of orbital inclina-
tion. Each simulation runs for 10,000 years in each case. We then
used𝑀𝐴𝑇𝐿𝐴𝐵toperformalinearfittingonthestabilityboundaries
of the Hill sphere for each plot. Based on the results from each plot,
weobtainedthestabilityboundaryoftheHillspherethatincludedall
the simulated parameters. The graph and formula are shown below:
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)

<<<PAGE 14>>>
14Pu et al.
FigureA1.Left:ThevariationofMEGNOwithsemimajoraxisofmoons(x
axis) and orbital eccentricity of the planet (y axis). A high value of MEGNO
(red color) expresses the chaotic behavior and low value (green color) shows
theregularity.Right:ThevariationofMEGNOwithsemimajoraxisofmoons
(xaxis)andmoon’sorbitalinclination.Noticethattheinclinationisexpressed
by radians in the graph.
𝑅𝐻 =𝑎(1−𝑒)
 𝑚
3𝑀
 1
3
·𝐼
𝐼=0.52(1+0.0036𝑖), 𝑖∈(0,50)
=0.25, 𝑖∈(50,140)
=0.52[1+0.022(𝑖−140)], 𝑖∈(140,180)
(A2)
With the new model, we can use it to assess the stability of
moons in our work. Although systems with multiple planets may
decrease the size of reduced Hill Sphere (prograde moons: I=0.4;
retrograde moons: I=0.65) [Payne et al. (2013)], this phenomenon
generally will not affect the results of simulation because we set a
relatively loose condition to guarantee the escape of moons.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–14 (2025)