<<<PAGE 1>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
(DOI: will be inserted by hand later)
© ESO 2023
Astronomy&Astrophysics
Characterization of stellar companion
from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
The EXtraction Of SPEctrum of COmpanion (E xospeco) algorithm
Samuel Thé1, Éric Thiébaut1, Loïc Denis2, Thibault Wanner1, Rémi Thiébaut1, Maud Langlois1, and Ferréol Soulez1
1 Université de Lyon, Université Lyon1, ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Centre de Recherche Astrophysique de Lyon UMR 5574, F-69230,
Saint-Genis-Laval, France
e-mail: surname.name@univ-lyon1.fr
2 Université Jean Monnet Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School, Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023,
SAINT-ETIENNE, France
e-mail: surname.name@univ-st-etienne.fr
June 5, 2023
ABSTRACT
Aims. High-contrast long-slit spectrographs can be used to characterize exoplanets. High-contrast long-slit spectroscopic data are
however corrupted by stellar leakages which largely dominate other signals and make the process of extracting the companion spec-
trum very challenging. This paper presents a complete method to calibrate the spectrograph and extract the signal of interest.
Methods. The proposed method is based on a flexible direct model of the high-contrast long-slit spectroscopic data. This model
explicitly accounts for the instrumental response and for the contributions of both the star and the companion. The contributions of
these two components and the calibration parameters are jointly estimated by solving a regularized inverse problem. This problem
having no closed-form solution, we propose an alternating minimization strategy to effectively find the solution.
Results. We have tested our method on empirical long-slit spectroscopic data and by injecting synthetic companion signals in these
data. The proposed initialization and the alternating strategy effectively avoid the self-subtraction bias, even for companions observed
very close to the coronagraphic mask. Careful modeling and calibration of the angular and spectral dispersion laws of the instrument
clearly reduce the contamination by the stellar leakages. In practice, the outputs of the method are mostly driven by a single hyper-
parameter which tunes the level of regularization of the companion SED.
Key words. Infrared: planetary systems – Methods: data analysis – Techniques: imaging spectroscopy – Instrumentation: spectro-
graphs – Instrumentation: adaptive optics
1. Introduction
High-contrast extreme adaptive optics (AO) systems such as
SPHERE (Spectro-Polarimetry High-contrast Exoplanet RE-
search, Beuzit et al. 2019), GPI (Gemini Planet Imager, Macin-
tosh et al. 2006, 2014), or SCExAO (Jovanovic et al. 2015) have
been developed to directly observe the close environment of stars
in the visible and the near infrared. The study of exoplanets and
their formation is one of the main scientific objective of these
instruments. One of the advantages of high-contrast extreme AO
systems is that they can provide direct access to the light from
the exoplanet which is crucial to perform spectral characteriza-
tions. Substantial contamination by the light from the host star
occurs, though: in the visible and the near infrared, in spite of the
real-time correction by the AO system and of the masking of the
host star by a coronagraph, the residual stellar light diffracted by
the instrument is much brighter than that received from most ex-
oplanets of interest. For this reason, dedicated post-processing
methods have been developed to track evidences of exoplanet
presence in data corrupted by strong stellar leakages. The num-
ber of published detection algorithms, L oci (Lafreniere et al.
2007), Tloci (Marois et al. 2013), K lip (Soummer et al. 2012),
Moods (Smith et al. 2009), A ndromeda (Mugnier et al. 2009),
PeX (Devaney & Thiébaut 2017), and Paco (Flasseur et al. 2018,
2020b,a) to name a few, reflects the scientific interest but also
the intrinsic di fficulty of trustfully detecting an exoplanet from
sequences of high-contrast images. The most successful of these
methods are the ones that take into account the statistics of the
stellar leakages (notably their correlations) whether they con-
sist in sequences of images (Smith et al. 2009; Flasseur et al.
2018, 2020b), in sequences of multi-spectral images from Inte-
gral field spectrographs (IFS) (Flasseur et al. 2020a), or even in
multi-epoch sequences of images (Dallant et al. 2022).
After its detection, the direct characterization of an exoplanet
is possible with high-contrast extreme AO systems equipped
with a spectrograph. Both SPHERE and GPI are equipped with
low resolution IFS. In addition SPHERE/IRDIS is equipped with
a medium (MRS) resolution long-slit spectrograph (LSS) in J, H,
and K bands, the latter being also available at low (LRS) resolu-
tion1 (Dohlen et al. 2008). With SPHERE/IRDIS/LSS, the spec-
trum of a detected companion can then be measured by align-
ing the slit of the spectrograph with the host star and the com-
panion while the host star is occulted by an opaque mask com-
bined with the slit. In an LSS image, the stellar leakages take the
form of speckles spectrally dispersed along oblique lines gen-
erally brighter than the companion spectrum (see Fig. 1 for an
1 λ/∆λ = 35 for the LRS mode orλ/∆λ = 400 for the MRS mode
Article number, page 1 of 19
arXiv:2306.03467v1  [astro-ph.IM]  6 Jun 2023

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
example). In order to get rid of these stellar leakages, Vigan
et al. (2008, 2012) have developed aspectral deconvolution (SD)
method following the work of Sparks & Ford (2002). The SD
method consists in a filtering of the LSS image after a geomet-
rical transform to align the speckles along a given direction. In
practice, the SD method is quite sensitive to the alignment of
the instrument, requires to fix defective pixels, and su ffers from
a self-subtraction bias. The latter is due to an overestimation of
the stellar leakages caused by the presence of the companion. To
improve on the SD method and reduce the self-subtraction bias,
Mesa, D. et al. (2016) have adapted the strategy implemented in
Tloci (Marois et al. 2013) to the case of LSS data. In spite of
these improvements, existing extraction methods su ffer from a
number of defaults, most of them steming from the requirement
to geometrically transform the LSS data to align the dispersed
speckles. In particular, they provide, at best, a least squares esti-
mation of the stellar leakages which is sub-optimal as the noise is
not independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) in the geomet-
rically transformed images (Thiébaut et al. 2016). To overcome
the drawbacks of existing methods, we propose to formulate the
extraction of the spectrum of a companion as an inverse problem.
The inverse problem corresponds to the joint estimation of the
contributions of the star and of its companion from the LSS data.
Not only does this approach require no transform of the LSS
data (thus avoiding the introduction of correlations) but it also
yields statistically optimal estimators. To cope both with pos-
sible instrumental misalignment and the lack of a closed-form
solution for the inverse problem, we implemented an alternat-
ing optimization strategy with optional self-calibration stages to
solve the problem.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we
present a model of the distribution of the light on the detector
of a LSS instrument. This model is used to illustrate how, after a
geometrical transform, stellar leakages can be partially removed
by a truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD) before ex-
tracting the companion signal. Such an approach is representa-
tive of the performance that can be reached, at best, by standard
methods. We then present in Section 3 our approach to jointly es-
timate the stellar leakages and the contribution of the companion
without transforming the data. For the processing of LSS data,
knowing the spectro-angular coordinates of each detector pixel
is mandatory and we describe in Section 4 a numerical method to
estimate the spatio-spectral dispersion laws from given calibra-
tion data. In Section 5, we validate the proposed method on both
real data from SPHERE /IRDIS/MRS and on injections of syn-
thetic companions in real data. We show the importance of the
calibration (described in Appendix A) and compare our method
with more standard approaches.
2. State of the art processing
In spite of the coronagraphic mask in high-contrast data, the
stellar leakages, in the form of quasi-static dispersed speckles,
largely dominate the signal of interest, i.e., the spectrum of the
companion. These speckles, whose contribution cannot be pre-
cisely determined by using other stars (i.e. by reference differen-
tial imaging, Xie et al. 2022) or by rotating the slit to hide the
planet (Vigan 2016) are a major source of nuisance for extract-
ing the companion spectrum. This section introduces a modeling
of the LSS data that is used in Section 3 to design our spectrum
extraction method. This model is also useful to explain how pre-
vious approaches perform the suppression of the stellar leakages
(Vigan et al. 2008; Mesa, D. et al. 2016).
λ
ρ
Fig. 1. Long-slit medium resolution spectroscopy data of HR 3549 taken
by IRDIS, with horizontally the spectral axisλ and vertically the angu-
lar separation axisρ. The blue arrows indicate the position of the com-
panion.
2.1. Image formation
Figure 1 shows a single exposure captured by the LSS of
SPHERE/IRDIS. The vector d∈ RN, with N the number of pix-
els, can be modeled by:
dn = m(ρn,λ n) +εn (1)
with m(ρ,λ ) the distribution of light in the detector plane at an-
gular coordinate ρ along the slit and wavelength λ, ρn and λn
the angular and spectral coordinates at the n-th pixel, andεn the
contribution of the noise. Our notations are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. The light distribution in the detector plane is the sum of
the contributions by the star and by the companion:
m(ρ,λ ) = f⋆(λ) h⋆(ρ,λ ) + f⊕(λ) h⊕(ρ,λ ) (2)
with f⋆ and f⊕ the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of the
star and of the companion as seen by the detector 2, h⋆ and h⊕
the point spread functions (PSFs) for a source at the respective
angular positions of the star and of the companion, the so-called
on-axis and o ff-axis PSFs. The on-axis PSF, h⋆(ρ,λ ) explains
the oblique bright lines due to stellar leakages in Fig. 1 while
the stellar SED f⋆(λ) explains the variations of intensity along
these lines. As can be seen in Fig. 1, the companion signal, that
is f⊕(λ) h⊕(ρ,λ ), is barely distinguishable in the LSS data and it
is mandatory to get rid of the stellar leakages f⋆(λ) h⋆(ρ,λ ).
2.2. Low rank approximation of the stellar leakages
Devaney & Thiébaut (2017) have shown that, except in the vicin-
ity of the coronagraphic mask, the chromatic PSF can be written
in the form of a series expansion. Applying their model to the
star and taking into account that our data have one angular di-
mension instead of two yields:
h⋆(ρ,λ ) =
X
k≥1γ(λ)k h⋆,k
 γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⋆) (3)
with γ(λ) = λref/λ a chromatic magnification factor relative to
some arbitrary reference wavelengthλref,ρ⋆ the angular position
of the star along the slit to account for a possible pointing error
of the instrument, and{h⋆,k}k=1,... a family of spatial PSF modes
at the reference wavelength.
Since the stellar leakages dominate the signal in the LSS im-
age d, Eq. (3) suggests to apply specific image warping so as to
form a 2-D image dwarp whose, say, first dimension varies along
2 these SEDs are a ffected by the chromatic transmission of the atmo-
sphere and of the instrument
Article number, page 2 of 19

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
Table 1. Notations. Lowercase letters are for continuous functions and
scalars (e.g. f⋆), boldface lowercase letters forvectors (e.g. x), and bold-
face uppercase letters for linear mappings, a.k.a. matrices, ( e.g. F⋆).
Vectors with a hat ( e.g. ˆx) are estimators. The main unknowns of the
problem are x, the sampled star SED, y, the sampled on-axis PSF, and
z, the sampled companion SED.
Notation Description
subscript⋆ Parameters of the stellar model
subscript⊕ Parameters of the companion model
d∈ RN Science data
m∈ RN Sampled model of d
w∈ RN Diagonal of the precision matrix of d
λ∈ RN Pixel-wise wavelengths
ρ∈ RN Pixel-wise angular positions
f⋆ Continuous star SED
x∈ RNx Sampled star SED f⋆
λgrd
⋆ ∈ RNx Sampling wavelengths for x
F⋆∈ RN×Nx Interpolation operator: x to pixel-wise f⋆
h⋆ Continuous on-axis PSF
y∈ RNy Sampled on-axis PSF h⋆ atλref
ρgrd
⋆ ∈ RNy Sampling angles for y
ρ⋆ Angular position of the star
ν⋆∈ Ω⋆ Calibration parameters of h⋆
Ω⋆ Feasible set h⋆ parameters
H⋆∈ RN×Ny Interpolation operator: y to pixel-wise h⋆
atλref
f⊕ Continuous companion SED
z∈ RNz Sampled companion SED f⊕
λgrd
⊕ ∈ RNx Sampling wavelengths for z
F⊕∈ RN×Nz Interpolation operator: z to pixel-wise f⊕
h⊕ Continuous off-axis PSF
h⊕∈ RN Sampled off-axis PSF h⊕ atλref
ν⊕∈ Ω⊕ Calibration parameters of h⊕
Ω⊕ Feasible set of h⊕ parameters
ρ⊕∈ R Angular position of the companion
µ = (µx,µ y,µ z) Hyper-parameters
γ∈ RN Pixel-wise chromatic scaling factors
ν = (ν⋆,ν⊕)∈ Ω Calibration parameters
Ω = Ω⋆× Ω⊕ Feasible set of calibration parameters
Λ Spectral dispersion law
a Parameters of the spectral dispersion law
ϱ Angular dispersion law
s Parameters of the angular dispersion law
∆ρ Width of the coronagraphic mask
the wavelength while its second dimension varies along coordi-
nate s =γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⋆) (see Fig. 2). According to Eqs. (1) and (3),
the warped image is modeled and then approximated by:
dwarp
i, j = m

ρ⋆ + swarp
j /γ

λwarp
i

,λ warp
i

+εwarp
i, j (4)
≈
X
k≥1
γ

λwarp
i
k
f⋆

λwarp
i

h⋆,k

swarp
j

(5)
where εwarp in Eq. (4) denotes the contribution of the noise in
the warped image while the≈ symbol in Eq. (5) is to account for
the contributions of the potential companion and for the noise
which have been neglected. In words, the stellar leakages appear
to have a simple separable decomposition in the warped image.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
λ
s =γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⋆)
Fig. 2. Warped HR 3549 image. This figure shows the bottom half of the
data shown in Fig. 1, corresponding to the side where lies the compan-
ion, warped so as to align the dispersed speckles of the stellar leakages.
The warping is defined by the coordinates ρ and λ of the pixels given
by the complex calibration model of the spectral and angular dispersion
laws described in Appendix A. The companion signal can be seen as a
faint curved track indicated by the blue arrows.
The Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the warped im-
age3 writes:
dwarp =
min(N1,N2)X
k=1
ukσk v⊤
k (6)
where N1 and N2 are the dimensions of the warped image,
uk ∈ RN1 is the k-th left singular vector of the decomposition,
σk≥ 0 is the k-th singular value, and vk∈ RN2 is the k-th right
singular vector. Comparing Eq. (5) and Eq. (6), the SVD ofdwarp
readily provides a decomposition similar to the contribution of
the stellar leakages with, for each index k, the left singular vec-
tor uk samplingγ(λ)k f⋆(λ) as a function of λ and the right sin-
gular vector vk sampling h⋆,k(s) as a function of s (both up to
a normalization factor that depends on k). The truncated sin-
gular value decomposition (TSVD) of the warped image is ob-
tained by limiting the sum in the right-hand side of Eq. (6) to the
kmax ≤ min(N1, N2) first terms and, by Eckart–Young–Mirsky
(Eckart & Young 1936; Mirsky 1960) theorem, it is the best pos-
sible approximation of dwarp of rank kmax in the least squares
sense. Hence, it may be assumed that, for a suitable choice of
kmax, the TSVD of dwarp provides a good approximation of the
stellar leakages without being too much affected by the compan-
ion signal (if the companion is not too bright) and by the noise. A
residual image that mostly depends on the companion can then
be formed by subtracting the un-warped TSVD of the warped
image dwarp from the LSS image d:
r⊕ = d−U

kmaxX
k=1
ukσk v⊤
k
 (7)
whereU denotes the un-warping operation 4. As illustrated by
Fig. 3, the signal of interest, the companion SED, is then easier to
extract from the residual image r⊕. This can be done by standard
aperture photometry tools.
As pointed by Devaney & Thiébaut (2017), there are a num-
ber of issues in using the TSVD to get rid of the stellar leak-
ages in multi-wavelengths high-contrast data. First, to produce a
3 considered as a simple matrix
4 e.g., a simple separable 2-D interpolation
Article number, page 3 of 19

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Fig. 3. Bottom half of the residual image r⊕ for the HR 3549 data with
stellar leakages estimated by the TSVD method as defined in Eq. 7 and
with the warped image shown in Fig. 2. Compared to the original data
shown in Fig. 1, the companion signal appears more distinctly (indi-
cated by the 2 arrows).
rectangular warped image (that can be interpreted as a matrix to
perform the SVD), quite substantial regions of the original data
d have to be discarded (near the coronagraphic mask and the
edges of the formed image). This limits the range of admissi-
ble angular positions for the companion and gets rid of data that
might be valuable to improve the estimation of the stellar leak-
ages. Second, the presence of a companion in the original data
d yields a positive bias in the approximation of the stellar leak-
ages by the TSVD. This results in a negative bias in the residual
image and, hence, in the estimated companion SED. This arti-
fact is known in the literature as "self-subtraction". Third, the
least squares fit performed by the TSVD of dwarp is sub-optimal
regarding the distribution of the noise in the warped image. In-
deed, least squares are only optimal for independent identically
distributed (i.i.d.) noise which is certainly not the case forεwarp
i, j :
at least, the shot noise in the image d has a non-uniform distri-
bution and a side effect of the transform of d to yield the warped
image dwarp is to introduce correlations. Moreover, defective pix-
els, which are quite numerous for the kind of detectors used by
NIR instruments such as LSS, must be corrected, usually by av-
eraging their neighbors values, before warping the image. This
correction can only introduce additional correlations.
In spite of these drawbacks, proposed processing methods
(Vigan et al. 2008; Mesa, D. et al. 2016) are similar to the TSVD
approximation of warped LSS images (optimal linear combina-
tion of a set of images). Some refinements have been proposed
to limit the self-subtraction bias (Mesa, D. et al. 2016) but the
other issues have been largely left unaddressed. In the remaining
of this paper, we propose a new inverse problems approach to
solve all aforementioned limitations.
3. Inverse problems approach
To avoid the issues resulting from warping the LSS image, we
propose to solve an inverse problem which consists in jointly es-
timating the parameters of the direct model of the data given in
Eqs. (1) and (2) without transforming the data themselves. For
an optimal information extraction, we model the likelihood of
the data to consider the uneven quality of the data and, there-
fore, account for defective pixels or missing data in a consistent
way. Besides, our approach relies on a precise calibration of the
spectro-spatial instrumental dispersion as seen by the detector.
The proposed method includes auto-calibration stages to refine
the calibration parameters and thus accounts for a possible mis-
alignment of the science exposures.
3.1. Assumed continuous model
To simplify the on-axis PSF model in Eq. (3), we keep only the
first and most significant of these modes and thus assume that:
h⋆(ρ,λ ) =γ(λ) h⋆
 γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⋆) (8)
with h⋆(ρ) = h⋆,1(ρ) the first spatial mode of the on-axis PSF.
As shown in Section 5, this simple model of the stellar leakages
already gives excellent results. Likewise, the chromatic o ff-axis
PSF h⊕ can also be written as:
h⊕(ρ,λ )≈γ(λ) h⊕
 γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⊕) (9)
with h⊕(ρ) = h⊕(ρ,λ ref) the off-axis PSF at the reference wave-
length λref and ρ⊕ the angular position of the companion along
the slit. Note that theγ(λ) factor ensures that the on-axis and off-
axis PSFs be normalized at all wavelengths provided the PSF at
the reference wavelength be also normalized, i.e.
R
h(ρ,λ ) dρ =
1 (∀λ). These approximations for the on-axis and o ff-axis PSFs
yield the following simplified model that we consider in the rest
of the paper:
m(ρ,λ ) =γ(λ) f⋆(λ) h⋆
 γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⋆)
+ f⊕(λ) h⊕
 γ(λ) (ρ−ρ⊕). (10)
3.2. Discretized distribution
In order to fit the data, the modelm(ρ,λ ) in Eq. (10) has to be es-
timated at each angular and spectral coordinates (ρn,λ n) of the N
pixels of the detector. These pixel coordinates can be identified
by fitting angular and spectral dispersion laws to calibration data,
as explained in Appendix A. Because of these angular and spec-
tral dispersion laws, continuous functions are needed to model
the SEDs of the star and the companion ( f⋆ and f⊕) and their
respective PSFs (h⋆ and h⊕) on the sensor pixel grid. We explain
next how we parameterize these functions.
Our models of the star SED f⋆(λ), of the on-axis PSF h⋆(ρ),
and of the companion SED f⊕(λ) are given by the following lin-
ear interpolations:
f⋆(λ) =
NxX
j=1
φ⋆

λ−λgrd
⋆, j

f⋆

λgrd
⋆, j

|   {z   }
x j
, (11a)
h⋆(ρ) =
NyX
j=1
ψ⋆

ρ−ρgrd
⋆, j

h⋆

ρgrd
⋆, j

|   {z   }
y j
, (11b)
f⊕(λ) =
NzX
j=1
φ⊕

λ−λgrd
⊕, j

f⊕

λgrd
⊕, j

|   {z   }
z j
, (11c)
with φ⋆: R→ R, ψ⋆: R→ R, and φ⊕: R→ R chosen inter-
polation functions, and where λgrd
⋆ ∈ RNx is an evenly spaced
grid of wavelengths to sample the star SED f⋆,ρgrd
⋆ ∈ RNy is an
evenly spaced grid of angles to sample the on-axis PSF h⋆, and
λgrd
⊕ ∈ RNz is an evenly spaced grid of wavelengths to sample
the companion SED f⊕. At the coordinates (ρn,λ n) of any pixel
Article number, page 4 of 19

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
Fig. 4. Illustration of the direct model for high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy given in Eq.(10): the data are modeled as the sum of two components:
a stellar component and a companion component. Extracting the SED of the companion also requires the estimation of the on-axis PSF and the
SED of the host star. The labels “available via calibration” denote components that may be self-calibrated by Exospeco directly from the science
data (see Section 3.5 for details).
n∈ J1, NK of the detector, our linear interpolation yields:
f⋆,n = f⋆(λn) =
XNx
j=1φ⋆

λn−λgrd
⋆, j

|          {z          }
F⋆,n, j
x j = (F⋆ x)n, (12a)
h⋆,n = h⋆
 γn (ρn−ρ⋆) =
XNy
j=1ψ⋆

γn

ρn−ρ⋆−ρgrd
⋆, j

|                        {z                        }
H⋆,n, j
y j
= (H⋆ y)n, (12b)
f⊕,n = f⊕(λn) =
XNz
i=1φ⊕

λn−λgrd
⊕, j

|          {z          }
F⊕,n,i
zi = (F⊕ z)n, (12c)
withγn =γ(λn), and the matrices F⋆∈ RN×Nx, H⋆∈ RN×Ny, and
F⊕∈ RN×Nz defined in Eqs. (12a)–(12c) represent interpolation
operators5. These operators are applied to the vectors6 x∈ RNx,
y∈ RNy, and z∈ RNz defined in Eqs. (11a)–(11c). They form the
unknown parameters of our models of the star SED f⋆, of the
on-axis PSF h⋆, and of the companion SED f⊕.
The interpolation functions ( φ⋆, ψ⋆, and φ⊕) and the sam-
pling lists (λgrd
⋆ ,ρgrd
⋆ , andλgrd
⊕ ) may be chosen differently for each
component of the model. If the spectral sampling lists and spec-
tral interpolation functions are the same (as we chose for our ex-
periments), then the two spectral interpolation operators F⊕ and
F⋆ are the same. In our implementation of the method, we se-
lected the Catmull & Rom (1974) cardinal cubic spline φ as the
5 In practice, the interpolation operators are very sparse and only their
non-zero entries need to be stored or computed on the fly.
6 We use boldface lowercase letters to denotes vectors, that is quan-
tities that depend on a single index, and boldface uppercase letters to
denotes linear operators, that is quantities that depend on two indices.
Article number, page 5 of 19

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
interpolation function:φ⋆(λ) =φ(λ/∆λgrd
⋆ ),ψ⋆(ρ) =φ(ρ/∆ρgrd
⋆ ),
and φ⊕(λ) = φ(λ/∆λgrd
⊕ ) with ∆λgrd
⋆ , ∆ρgrd
⋆ , and ∆λgrd
⊕ the sam-
pling steps ofλgrd
⋆ ,ρgrd
⋆ , andλgrd
⊕ .
For the o ff-axis PSF h⊕(ρ) at the reference wavelength, we
consider a simple parametric model. Since the principal lobe of
the off-axis PSF represents most of the energy received from the
companion, we assume a Gaussian approximation:
h⊕(ρ) = 1√
2πσ⊕
exp

− ρ2
2σ2
⊕

. (13)
Hence h⊕, the sampled off-axis PSF at the reference wavelength
for the companion, depends on the angular position of the com-
panion ρ⊕ and on σ⊕ the standard deviation of the PSF at the
reference wavelength. Other parametric models of the o ff-axis
PSF could be considered with a simple adaptation of the algo-
rithm proposed in Section 3.4.
Finally, we introduce the N-vectors m∈ RN, γ∈ RN and
h⊕∈ RN defined by:
mn = m(ρn,λ n), (14a)
γn =γ(λn) =λref/λn, (14b)
h⊕,n = h⊕
 γn (ρn−ρ⊕), (14c)
for n∈ J1, NK. The discretized model of the light distribution in
Eq. (10) then writes:
m(x, y, z,ν) =γ⊙ (H⋆(ν) y)⊙ (F⋆ x) +γ⊙ h⊕(ν)⊙ (F⊕ z) (15)
with⊙ the Hadamard product (entry-wise multiplication) and
ν = (ν⋆,ν⊕) the calibration parameters of the model which are
the other unknown parameters than x, y, or z. With our Gaussian
approximation of the o ff-axis PSF at the reference wavelength,
the calibration parameters for the companion are ν⊕ = (ρ⊕,σ⊕).
To account for a possible misalignment between the corona-
graphic mask and the star, the calibration parameters for the star
are justν⋆ = (ρ⋆), withρ⋆ the angular position of the star along
the slit.
The signal-processing problem then amounts to estimating
the companion’s SED z as well as the other nuisance parame-
ters of the model, x, y, and ν. A method to perform this task is
proposed in the next section.
3.3. Objective function and regularization
After proper calibration of the detector, raw images are pre-
processed to compensate for bias and gain non-uniformity and
to identify defective pixels ( i.e. pixels with a non-linear re-
sponse). This pre-processing produces the long-slit spectroscopy
data d ∈ RN considered here and modeled by m(x, y, z,ν) in
Eq. (15). Due to photon and detector noises as well as model-
ing inaccuracies, some discrepancies are expected between the
data d and our model m(x, y, z,ν). Due to the observed flux
level, there are enough photons detected per pixel for the data
d to approximately follow a Gaussian distribution of mean the
model m(x, y, z,ν) and of precision matrix7 W. Since we directly
consider the data without any pixel interpolation (i.e. no image
warping to align the dispersed speckles and no attempt to fix de-
fective pixels), no correlations are introduced in the data and the
pixels can be considered as mutually independent. The precision
7 the precision matrix is the inverse of the covariance matrix
matrix is thus diagonal, W = diag(w) where w∈ RN collects the
diagonal entries of W and is given by:
wn =
(0 if n-th pixel is invalid,
1/Var(dn) otherwise. (16)
where Var( dn) can be estimated by di fferent pre-processing
methods (Mugnier et al. 2004; Berdeu et al. 2020). We consider
as invalid all pixels for which the model is incorrect, this in-
cludes defective pixels, pixels too much impacted by the corona-
graphic mask, and pixels located outside of the field of view (see
Fig. 6). We assume that the estimation of the variances and the
identification of defective pixels are part of the pre-processing
stage. The definition of the precision matrix in Eq. (16) amounts
to assuming that the variance of invalid pixels is infinite. In other
words, this expresses that the values of invalid pixels should not
be considered at all. Given the large number of unknowns, the
estimation of the stellar and companion components x, y, and
z cannot be performed solely by fitting the data: regularity con-
straints are necessary to prevent noise amplification and cope
with missing data (Titterington 1985). We consider regularized
estimators obtained by minimizing the following criterion:
C(x, y, z,ν,µ) =∥d− m(x, y, z,ν)∥2
W +Rx y z(x, y, z,µ), (17)
where the first term is a statistical distance between the model
and the data (the co-log-likelihood) while Rx y z(x, y, z,µ) is a
regularization term parameterized by the vector µ of so-called
hyper-parameters. In the above equation, ∥u∥2
W = u⊤ W u de-
notes the squared Mahalanobis (1936) norm. Our estimators ˆx,
ˆy, ˆz, and ˆν of the parameters of interest are the ones that jointly
minimize the criterion in Eq. (17):
(ˆx(µ), ˆy(µ), ˆz(µ), ˆν(µ)) = arg min
x≥0, y≥0,
z≥0,ν∈Ω
C(x, y, z,ν,µ). (18)
These estimators depend on the hyper-parametersµ, as made ex-
plicit by the notation. As the parameters x, y, and z represent
nonnegative quantities, their estimators are improved by enforc-
ing nonnegativity as indicated by the inequality constraints in
Eq. (18) such as x≥ 0 which hold element-wise. The calibra-
tion parameters ν = (ν⋆,ν⊕) are constrained to belong to a set
Ω = Ω⋆×Ω⊕ where Ω⋆ and Ω⊕ are the respective feasible sets for
the stellar and companion calibration parameters defined based
on physical considerations.
The SEDs and the on-axis PSF at the reference wavelength
being mutually independent, the regularization function can be
decomposed as:
Rx y z(x, y, z,µ) =µxRx(x) +µyRy(y) +µzRz(z). (19)
The complete set of hyper-parameters is then:
µ = (µx,µ y,µ z) (20)
where µx > 0, µy > 0, and µz > 0 tune the weights of the
different regularization terms.
There are many regularizations that are suitable for our prob-
lem. Regularization terms should enforce some kind of continu-
ity or smoothness of the sought uni-dimensional distributions.
In the following and for the sake of simplicity, we consider sim-
ple smoothness regularizations imposed by the quadratic penalty
(Tikhonov & Arsenin 1977):
R(u) =
XNu−1
j=1
 u j+1− u j|    {z    }
(D u) j
2 =∥D u∥2
2, (21)
with Nu the size of u = x, y, or z, and D∈ R(Nu−1)×Nu a finite
difference operator.
Article number, page 6 of 19

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
3.4. Alternating minimization strategy
The joint minimization of the criterion defined in Eq. (17) re-
quires to cope with a highly non-linear function whose condi-
tioning may be very bad and depends on the scaling of the pa-
rameters. We propose to solve the problem by an alternated mini-
mization strategy, that is estimating each set of parameters given
the others. Such a strategy consists in sequentially solving the
following sub-problems:
ˆx(y, r⋆,ν⋆,µ x) = arg min
x≥0
C(x, y, z,ν,µ)
= arg min
x≥0
n
∥A⋆ x− r⋆∥2
W +µxRx(x)
o
, (22a)
ˆy(x, r⋆,ν⋆,µ y) = arg min
y≥0
C(x, y, z,ν,µ)
= arg min
y≥0
n
∥B⋆ y− r⋆∥2
W +µyRy(y)
o
, (22b)
ˆν⋆(x, y, r⋆) = arg min
ν⋆∈Ω⋆
C(x, y, z,ν,µ)
= arg min
ν⋆∈Ω⋆
∥m⋆(x, y,ν⋆)− r⋆∥2
W, (22c)
ˆz(r⊕,ν⊕,µ z) = arg min
z≥0
C(x, y, z,ν,µ)
= arg min
z≥0
n
∥A⊕ z− r⊕∥2
W +µzRz(z)
o
, (22d)
ˆν⊕(z, r⊕) = arg min
ν⊕∈Ω⊕
C(x, y, z,ν,µ)
= arg min
ν⊕∈Ω⊕
∥m⊕(z,ν⊕)− r⊕∥2
W, (22e)
with:
∀x, A⋆x =γ⊙  H⋆(ν) y⊙ (F⋆ x), (23a)
∀y, B⋆ y =γ⊙  F⋆ x⊙ (H⋆(ν)y), (23b)
∀z, A⊕ z =γ⊙  h⊕(ν)⊙ (F⊕ z), (23c)
r⋆ = d− m⊕(z,ν⊕), (23d)
r⊕ = d− m⋆(x, y,ν⋆), (23e)
m⋆(x, y,ν⋆) =γ⊙ (H⋆(ν) y)⊙ (F⋆ x) = A⋆ x = B⋆ y, (23f)
m⊕(z,ν⊕) =γ⊙ h⊕(ν)⊙ (F⊕ z) = A⊕ z. (23g)
We enforce positivity constraints for the variables x, y, and z,
while Ω⋆ and Ω⊕ respectively denote the feasible set of param-
etersν⋆ andν⊕. Note that m⋆(x, y,ν⋆) and m⊕(z,ν⊕) defined in
Eqs. (23f) and (23g) are the respective contributions of the star
and companion.
When the convex regularization defined in (21) is chosen
and A⊤
⋆W A⋆, B⊤
⋆WB⋆, and A⊤
⊕ W A⊕ are invertible, each of the
Problems (22a), (22b), and (22d) is strictly convex and thus
has a unique solution which can be found by using existing
algorithms8. This is another advantage of the alternated strat-
egy. Since the original minimization problem (18) is not jointly
convex with respect to all unknowns, only a local minimum is
reached by the alternating minimization scheme, though.
We solve for the two stellar components x and y following
the alternated method proposed by Thé et al. (2020) to exploit
the scaling indetermination of this problem (see Appendix C for
details). This method is implemented by Algorithm 1 and takes
8 For example, in the unconstrained case and with quadratic regular-
izations, the solution of one of these sub-problem has a closed-form
expression. Otherwise, each of these sub-problems can be solved by op-
timization algorithms such as quasi-Newton methods with bound con-
straints (e.g., Thiébaut 2002).
Algorithm 1: FitStar — fit stellar parameters.
Input: r⋆∈ RN, W∈ RN×N, x[0]∈ RNx,ν[0]
⋆ ,µx > 0,
andα0 > 0.
Output: ˆx, ˆy, and ˆν⋆ a local minimum ofC in x, y, and
ν⋆.
k = 0
µy = 1
while not converged do
while true do
▶ Update on-axis PSF
y[k+1] = ˆy x[k], r⋆,ν[k]
⋆ ,α−2
k µy
 ◁ Eq. (22b)
αk+1/2 = ˆα x[k], y[k+1],µ x,µ y
 ◁ Eq. (C.4)
if k≥ 1 orαk+1/2≈αk then break
αk =αk+1/2
▶ Update star SED
x[k+1] = ˆx y[k+1], r⋆,ν[k]
⋆ ,α 2
k+1/2µx
 ◁ Eq. (22a)
αk+1 = ˆα x[k+1], y[k+1],µ x,µ y
 ◁ Eq. (C.4)
▶ Auto-calibration (optional)
ν[k+1]
⋆ ← ˆν⋆
 x[k+1], y[k+1], r⋆
 ◁ Eq. (22c)
k← k + 1
ˆx←αk x[k]
ˆy← y[k]/αk
ˆν⋆←ν[k]
⋆
as inputs the residuals r⋆ = d− m⊕(z,ν⊕) ( i.e. the data with-
out the contribution of the companion), the precision matrix W,
initial calibration parameters ν[0]
⋆ , the hyper-parameters µx > 0
(hyper-parameterµy is set to the arbitrary value 1 in Algorithm
1), initial estimates x[0] of the stellar SED, and initial estimate
α0 > 0 of the scaling parameter. Algorithm 1 deserves some re-
marks:
1. The initial stellar SED x[0] must be such thatRx(x[0])> 0 to
be able to apply formula (C.4) to compute the optimal scaling
factor (i.e., a non-flat SED). The initial stellar SED can be
provided by calibration data (see Appendix B); otherwise it
can be computed from the science data d by the following
weighted mean:
∀ j∈ J1, NxK : x[0]
⋆, j =
P
n∈X j wn dn
P
n∈X j wn
(24)
with wn = Wn,n the n-th diagonal term of the precision matrix
and:
X j =
n
n∈ J1, NK

λgrd
⋆, j−λn
 = min
j′∈J1,NxK
λgrd
⋆, j′−λn

o
(25)
the set of pixels whose nearest wavelength in the model grid
is the j-th one. Since Algorithm 1 scales the final compo-
nents x[k] and y[k] by the corresponding optimal scaling fac-
tor,α0 = 1 is a natural choice for the initial scaling factor
in subsequent calls to Algorithm 1 (to refine the solution or
after having improved the other parameters).
2. The inner loop of Algorithm 1 avoids sensitivity to the initial
scaling of the parameters (Thé et al. 2020).
3. The convergence criterion of Algorithm 1 is left unspecified.
In our implementation, we chose to stop the algorithm when
the relative change, in norm, between two consecutive iter-
ates is smaller than 10−3.
Article number, page 7 of 19

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
Algorithm 2: FitCompanion — fit companion parame-
ters.
Input: residuals r⊕∈ RN, precision matrix W, initial
off-axis PSF parametersν[0]
⊕ ,µz > 0.
Output: ˆz and ˆν⊕, a local minimum ofC in z andν⊕
given m⋆(x, y,ν⋆) the model of the stellar
contribution.
k = 0
while not converged do
▶ Update companion SED
z[k+1] = ˆz r⊕,ν[k]
⊕ ,µ z
 ◁ Eq. (22d)
▶ Update off-axis PSF (optional)
ν[k+1]
⊕ = ˆν⊕
 z[k+1], r⊕
 ◁ Eq. (22e)
k← k + 1
ˆz← z[k]
ˆν⊕←ν[k]
⊕
4. Although they represent very di fferent physical quantities,
the problem is quite symmetric in variables x and y. Thus
a variant of Algorithm 1 can be easily implemented to start
with an initial estimate y[0] of the stellar on-axis PSF at the
reference wavelength instead of an initial estimate x[0] of the
stellar SED. For the very first run, this variant of Algorithm 1
is started with the weighted average of the on-axis PSF de-
fined by:
∀ j∈ J1, NyK : y[0]
⋆, j =
P
n∈Y j wn dn
P
n∈Y j wn
(26)
with:
Y j =
n
n∈ J1, NK

ρgrd
⋆, j−ρn
 = min
j′∈J1,NyK
ρgrd
⋆, j′−ρn

o
(27)
the set of pixels whose nearest angular position in the model
grid is the j-th one.
5. When the SED z of the companion is not yet known, it is suf-
ficient to call Algorithm 1 with the weights of the pixels the
most impacted by the companion set to zero (we write the
corresponding precision matrix W⋆) to estimate the compo-
nents x and y of the stellar leakages without introducing a
significant bias due to the contribution of the companion.
Algorithm 2 (FitCompanion) implements an alternated strat-
egy to estimate the parameters z and ν of the companion SED
and its off-axis PSF at the reference wavelength. It takes as in-
puts the residuals r⊕ = d− m⋆(x, y,ν⋆) ( i.e. the data without
the contribution of the star) and their respective weights W, the
hyper-parameter µz > 0 and an initial estimate ν[0]
⊕ ∈ Ω⊕ of
the parameters of the o ff-axis PSF at the reference wavelength.
These latter parameters can be given by the calibration described
in Appendix B. Algorithm 2 also deserves some remarks:
1. The outputs of the algorithm only depend on the residual data
r⊕ defined in Eq. (23e) that need to be computed only once
(on entry of the algorithm and not at each iterations).
2. Like for Algorithm 1, various stopping criteria may be im-
plemented to break the loop.
3. Like for Algorithm 1, we can use the VMLM-B algorithm
(Thiébaut 2002) to solve Problem (22d) to estimate z under
a non-negativity constraint.
Algorithm 3: Exospeco algorithm
Input: The data d and its precision matrix W, the
masked precision matrix W⋆, initial estimates
x[0],ν[0]
⋆ , andν[0]
⊕ , and hyper-parametersµx > 0
andµz > 0.
Output: ˆx, ˆy, ˆz, ˆν⋆, and ˆν⊕ a local minimum ofC.
µy = 1
z[0] = 0
ˆα = 1
k = 0
while not converged do
if k = 0 then
▶ Hide companion
W′ = W⋆ ◁ Eq. (28)
else
▶ Account for companion
W′ = W
▶ Update star leakage model
r[k]
⋆ = d− m⊕
 z[k],ν[k]
⊕
 ◁ Eq. (23d) x[k+1], y[k+1],ν[k+1]
⋆
 =
FitStar r[k]
⋆ , W′, x[k],ν[k]
⋆ ,µ x, ˆα
▶ Update companion model
r[k+1]
⊕ = d− m⋆
 x[k+1], y[k+1],ν[k+1]
⋆
 ◁ Eq. (23e) z[k+1],ν[k+1]
⊕
 = FitCompanion r[k+1]
⊕ , W,ν[k]
⊕ ,µ z

k← k + 1
(ˆx, ˆy, ˆz, ˆν⋆, ˆν⊕)←  x[k], y[k], z[k],ν[k]
⋆ ,ν[k]
⊕

In both algorithms, there are optional self-calibration steps
performed by solving Problem (22c) in Algorithm 1 (F itStar)
and Problem (22e) in Algorithm 2 (F itCompanion) to estimate
the parameters of the on-axis and o ff-axis PSFs. These mini-
mizations can be carried out by a derivative-free minimization
algorithm. When there is a single calibration parameter, we use
Brent (2013) Fmin algorithm; if there are several parameters, we
use one of Powell’s derivative-free methods Newuoa or Bobyqa
(Powell 2006, 2009) depending on the constraints defined by Ω.
3.5. The Exospeco algorithm
FitStar (Algorithm 1) and F itCompanion (Algorithm 2) are the
building blocks of the E xospeco method given in Algorithm 3
for estimating all unknowns. Only a few additional remarks are
worth being made:
1. For the first estimation of the stellar leakage parameters, it
is beneficial to define a masked version W⋆ of the precision
matrix of the data to avoid a significant bias of the first es-
timates due to the signal from the companion, which would
slow down the convergence of Algorithm 3. The masked pre-
cision matrix is simply given by:
W⋆ = diag(w⋆), (28)
where the weights w⋆ are those of the precision matrix W of
the data except that they are set to zero for the pixels that are
the most impacted by the companion:
∀n∈ J1, NK : w⋆,n =
(0 if γn|ρn−ρ⊕|≤ τ
wn otherwise (29)
withτ> 0 the angular half-width at the reference wavelength
of the impacted region. In practiceτ is taken to be 2-3 times
Article number, page 8 of 19

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
σ[0]
⊕ the initial angular standard deviation of the off-axis PSF
at the reference wavelength.
2. The model of the stellar leakage only depends on either µx
orµy, the other being arbitrarily chosen. For this reason Al-
gorithm 3 takes as inputs only 2 hyper-parametersµx andµz,
the remaining hyper-parameter being set toµy = 1.
3. After extracting the companion’s spectrum by E xospeco Al-
gorithm 3, it is possible to express it as a contrast relative
to the host star which can be multiplied by a reference spec-
trum of the star to get rid of the atmospheric absorption (see
Appendix B).
4. The auto-calibration steps in F itStar (Algorithm 1) and Fit-
Companion (Algorithm 2) are optional and consist in the res-
olution of Problems (22c) and (22e). As these problems are
non-convex, activating the auto-calibration at the beginning
of the method can lead to a local minimum. To avoid such a
behavior, it is possible to start the self-calibration of ν⋆ and
ν⊕ only after a few iterations of Exospeco (Algorithm 3).
5. Controlling the number of inner iterations to solve each sub-
problem could be done by changing the value of the stopping
parameter ϵ (cf. remark 3 in Section 3.4): the smaller ϵ the
more inner iterations are needed and conversely. But this is
expected to also impact the number of outer iterations. Ow-
ing to the modest amount of time (2-3 min.) taken by our
implementation of Exospeco to solve the entire problem, we
did not investigate whether the algorithm can be e ffectively
accelerated by changing ϵ and keep the value ϵ = 10−3 sug-
gested before.
4. Calibration
The direct model in Eq. (15) assumes known the physical coor-
dinates (ρn,λ n) of each pixel n of the detector. We describe in
this section a consistent approach to derive the spectro-angular
dispersion laws of the instrument from calibration data.
4.1. Calibration data
Calibration data takes the form of an image such as the one
shown in Fig. 5 which is obtained by illuminating the spec-
trograph slit with Nλ laser sources 9. This produces Nλ mono-
chromatic lines on the detector, each being interrupted by the
coronagraphic mask. The calibration image dcal is of size I× J
and, for the calibration procedure, we denote by n∼ (i, j) the
one to one mapping between the pixel number n and its indices
i∈ J1, IK and j∈ J1, JK along the first and second dimensions of
the detector.
The calibration image shall have been pre-processed to com-
pensate for bias and non-uniform response of the detector. Fur-
thermore, we assume known a mask of valid pixels :
wmsk,i, j =
(1 if the pixel ( i, j) is valid,
0 else . (30)
We consider a pixel as beinginvalid if its value cannot follow the
assumed direct model given in Eq. (15). Invalid pixels include
pixels outside the field of view, pixels under the coronagraphic
mask or close to this mask, and defective pixels whose level does
not linearly depend on the illumination. Figure 6 shows the mask
of valid pixels for the HR 3549 data: the field of view and the
coronagraphic mask are outlined by the two green trapezes while
the defective pixels are marked by green dots.
9 Nλ = 6 at wavelengths 0 .9877 µm, 1 .1237 µm, 1 .3094 µm,
1.5451 µm, 1.73 µm, and 2.015 µm for SPHERE/IRDIS
4.2. Dispersion laws
There are two dispersion laws to calibrate: Λ(i, j) for the wave-
length andϱ(i, j) for the separation angle along the slit. To deter-
mine the best approximation of these spectro-angular dispersion
laws, we compared three models:
– The standard model which assumes that the dispersion laws
are uni-dimensional polynomials with spectral and angular
directions aligned with the detector axes:
Λsta(i, j) =
XPλ
p=0 ap jp, (31a)
ϱsta(i, j) =
XPρ
p=0 sp ip, (31b)
with Pλ and Pρ the degrees of the polynomials and
{ap}p∈J0,PλK and{sp}p∈J0,PρK their coefficients. For Pρ = 1 and
Pλ = 3− 5, the standard model reproduces what is done in
the software by Vigan et al. (2008) usually used to process
SPHERE/LSS data.
– A model of medium complexity, also assuming 1D polynomi-
als for the dispersion laws but accounting for misalignment
anglesϕλ andϕρ≈ϕλ+90◦ respectively between the spectral
and angular directions and the detector axes:
Λmed(i, j) =
XPλ
p=0 ap (i sinϕλ + j cosϕλ)p, (32a)
ϱmed(i, j) =
XPρ
p=0 sp (i sinϕρ + j cosϕρ)p. (32b)
Note that taking ϕλ = 0◦ and ϕϱ = 90◦ yields the standard
model.
– A more complex model which assumes 2D polynomials for
the dispersion laws and, depending on the degree of these
polynomials, can account for more complex image distor-
tions than a simple rotation:
ΛExospeco(i, j) =
XPλ
p1=0
XPλ−p1
p2=0 ap1,p2 ip1 jp2, (33a)
ϱExospeco(i, j) =
XPρ
p1=0
XPρ−p1
p2=0 sp1,p2 ip1 jp2. (33b)
To summarize, the considered dispersion laws are polynomials
of respective degree Pλ and Pρ. Their calibration amounts to fit-
ting their coefficients a and s given the calibration image dcal as
explained in the next sub-sections.
4.3. Calibration of the spectral dispersion law Λ
To calibrate the spectral dispersion law Λ, we extract from the
calibration image dcal (see Fig. 5) Nλ lists of pixel coordinates
following the path of each spectral line on the detector and esti-
mate the coefficients a by a least squares fit:
ˆa = arg min
a
NλX
ℓ=1
X
(i, j)∈Cℓ(ϕλ)
 λℓ− Λ(i, j)2 (34)
whereCℓ(ϕλ) denotes the list of, possibly fractional, pixel co-
ordinates (i, j) along the ℓ-th spectral line on the detector. Since
Λ(i, j) linearly depends on the coefficients a, the solution ˆa of the
above problem has a closed form expression (Lawson & Hanson
1974) that is easy to compute.
To extract the pathsCℓ(ϕλ) of the spectral lines, we first com-
pute a transverse projection q⊥(ϕλ) of the calibration image dcal
tuning the projection angleϕλ so as to maximize the peak values
Article number, page 9 of 19

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
~ angular position ρ
total intensity
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 0
 j axis
i axis
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
total intensity
~ wavelength λ
projection
projection
q⊥: transverse projection
of spectral lines
q//ℓ: profile ofℓ-th
spectral line
 idownℓ , jdownℓ

 iup
ℓ, jup
ℓ

Fig. 5. Calibration data for the SPHERE/IRDIS instrument and for the observations of HR 3549 on 2015/12/28. Central panel: calibration image.
Left and top panels: projections of the calibration data along the 2nd spectral line (in green) and across all spectral lines (in red).
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Fig. 6. Valid pixel mask for the HR 3549 data observed on 2015-12-28
in MRS mode.
in of the resulting projection. This transverse projection is plot-
ted in red in the top panel of Fig. 5 and corresponds toϕλ≈ 0◦ for
the considered calibration data. Equations (A.1) in Appendix A.1
formally define how we carefully compute the projection avoid-
ing invalid pixels. We then use the procedure described in Ap-
pendix A.2 to locate the position of theNλ most significant peaks
in the transverse projection q⊥(ϕλ) which can be seen as a mean
cross section of the spectral lines. Finally, we use the method de-
scribed in Appendix A.3 to extract the coordinates of the points
defining the Nλ pathsCℓ(ϕλ). These coordinates are given by the
centers of gravity (again accounting for invalid pixels thanks to
the mask) of the calibration data in small sliding rectangular win-
dows along each spectral lines (see Appendix A.3 for details).
4.4. Calibration of the angular dispersion law ϱ
To calibrate the angular dispersion law ϱ, we extract from the
calibration image dcal (see Fig. 5) the positions of the edges of
the coronagraphic mask for each of the Nλ spectral lines and
estimate the coefficients s of the polynomial and the width∆ρ of
the mask by a least squares fit:
( ˆϕρ, ˆ∆ρ, ˆs) = arg min
ϕρ,∆ρ,s
( NλX
ℓ=1

ϱ idown
ℓ , jdown
ℓ
 + ∆ρ/2
2
+
NλX
ℓ=1

ϱ iup
ℓ , jup
ℓ
− ∆ρ/2
2
)
(35)
where  idown
ℓ , jdown
ℓ
 and  iup
ℓ , jup
ℓ
 denote the coordinates of the
edges of the coronagraphic mask respectively on the downhill
and uphill sides along the profile of the ℓ-th spectral line. To
solve this problem, we exploit that the criterion is quadratic in
the unknowns s and ∆ρ which thus have a closed-form solution
(Lawson & Hanson 1974) which depends on ϕρ. Replacing this
closed-form solution in the criterion yields an uni-variate objec-
tive function that only depends onϕρ and which we minimize by
Brent (2013) Fmin method starting atϕρ =ϕλ + 90◦.
Article number, page 10 of 19

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
As explained in Appendix A.4, the coordinates of the edges
of the coronagraphic mask for theℓ-th spectral line are obtained
from the longitudinal profile q//ℓ(ϕλ) of the line which is the
weighted projection, in a direction perpendicular to the transver-
sal projection q⊥(ϕλ), of the calibration data in a window encom-
passing the line. The longitudinal profile q//ℓ(ϕλ) for the second
(ℓ = 2) line is plotted in green in the left panel of Fig. 5 and the
corresponding window is outlined in green in the central panel
of Fig. 5.
4.5. Comparison of the calibration models
To compare the calibration models considered in Section 4.2,
we apply E xospeco (Algorithm 3) on a scientific dataset of the
star HR 3549 observed in MRS mode of SPHERE /IRDIS on
2015/12/28. Figure 7 shows the residuals r = d− m, that is the
difference between the data and their model, computed for the
different spectro-angular dispersion laws. This figure shows that
the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the residuals are significantly
reduced when using more flexible calibration models than the
standard one. The improvement brought by the medium com-
plexity model compared to the standard model proves that ac-
counting for a slight angular misalignment between the spatial
and spectral directions and the detector axes is important. Com-
pared to the medium model, the complex model is able to account
other image distortions than a simple rotation and thus achieves
a better suppression of the stellar leakages. These results moti-
vate the choice of the complex dispersion model in Exospeco to
reduce the RMS level of the residual stellar leakages by a fac-
tor of∼ 2 compared to the standard model and should therefore
result in a better extraction of the companion contribution. Re-
member that the simple standard calibration model is similar to
what is usually done by others for these data.
5. Validation and tuning of the method
To fully validate the method, we propose in this section a study
of the method on both real data and data where a synthetic com-
panion was injected. This study allows us to both evaluate the
modeling of the stellar leakages, and so its subtraction in the
residuals, and the extraction of the companion, by comparing
with a ground truth spectrum.
5.1. Reduction of the self-subtraction
One of the feature of E xospeco is that it jointly estimates the
contributions of the star and of the companion whose parame-
ters are iteratively refined until convergence. Figure 8 shows the
residuals close to the companion (in the region outlined by the
black rectangle in the bottom of Fig. 7) with the complex model
of the spatial and spectral dispersion laws in two cases: after the
first outer iteration of E xospeco and after convergence of the al-
gorithm. In the first outer iteration of E xospeco, the model of
the stellar leakages is estimated by masking the region most im-
pacted by the companion, see Eq. (28), which is similar to what
is done by conventional methods. In all other outer iterations of
Exospeco, the contribution of the other component is taken into
account when fitting a given component (star or companion). As
shown by the bottom panel of Fig. 8, there is a noticeable bias
in the estimated companion’s SED after the first outer iteration.
This so-called self-subtraction bias is mostly avoided by the pro-
posed alternating strategy.
0 200 400 600 800
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80Standard calibration
RMS = 4.675e-03
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0 200 400 600 800
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80Medium calibration
RMS = 3.068e-03
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0 200 400 600 800
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80Complex calibration
RMS = 2.619e-03
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Fig. 7. Residuals between the HR 3549 scientific data and the model of
the stellar leakages, assuming a standard (top figure), medium (center),
and complex (bottom) calibration models. The RMS values of the resid-
uals are given for each model. The iso-levels of ρ/λ which are approx-
imately followed by the dispersed stellar speckles are plotted as green
dashed lines. The position of the companion at the different wavelengths
(i.e., atρ =ρ⊕) is plotted as an orange dashed line.
5.2. T uning of the regularization parameters
As described in Appendix C, the fact that the model of the star
leakages is bi-linear makes it possible to tune the regularization
Article number, page 11 of 19

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
5
10One iteration
RMS = 1.166e-03
0.1
0.0
0.1
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
5
10After convergenceRMS = 8.562e-04
0.1
0.0
0.1
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
wavelength [nm]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Companion SED [unitless]
after convergence
1 iteration
Fig. 8. Residuals between the HR 3549 scientific data and the model of
the stellar leakages near the companion (defined by the black rectangle
in the bottom of Fig. 7) and for the complex model of the spatial and
spectral dispersion laws after one iteration (top) and after convergence
(middle) of E xpospec. The RMS of the residuals in this region are sig-
nificantly reduced after convergence. The orange dashed line indicates
the position of the companion at the different wavelengths. The SEDs of
the companion (including atmospheric absorption) extracted from these
residuals are plotted in the bottom-most panel.
of this component by a single hyper-parameter, the other hyper-
parameter being held fixed. Thanks to this, the solution found by
Exospeco only depends on 2 hyper-parameters, one for the star,
say,µx (while µy = 1 is imposed) and one for the companion,
µz. In this section, we highlight the incidence on the companion
SED extracted by Exospeco of these remaining hyper-parameters
using the same scientific data set as in Section 4.5.
Figure 9 shows the SEDs of the companion estimated by
Exospeco for di fferent values of the star regularization hyper-
parameters (µy = 1 andµx = 10−3, 10, and 105). For such a large
range of values, the di fferences between the extracted compan-
ion SEDs are smaller than 1%. The stellar regularization hyper-
parameters have thus a limited impact on the resulting compan-
ion SED. The tuning ofµx can thus reasonably be done by visual
inspection.
On the contrary, as Fig. 10 shows, the hyper-parameter µz
has a strong impact on the resulting companion SED. This is
expected asµz directly tunes the strength of the smoothness con-
straint for the companion SED z. This hyper-parameter has thus
to be carefully chosen to find the best compromise between a
solution that is too smooth ( e.g. forµz = 107 in Fig. 10) or too
noisy (e.g. forµz = 102 in Fig. 10). It is worth noticing that the
correct value of µz strongly depends on the considered data, so
µz = 105, which seems to be a good choice for the HR 3549 data
(see Fig. 10), should not be considered as a universal value.
Many methods have been proposed to automatically tune the
hyper-parameter(s) of an inverse problem: the Generalized Cross
Validation (CGV , Golub et al. 1979), Stein’s Unbiased Risk
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Companion SED [unitless]
x = 10
x = 10 3
x = 105
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
wavelength [nm]
0.0025
0.0000
0.0025
Residuals
Fig. 9. Top: Profiles of the companion SED z, for di fferent levels of
the stellar hyper-parameter µx and with µy = 1 and µz = 105. Bottom:
differences between the profile for µx = 10 and the profiles for µx =
10−3 (dashed orange) andµx = 105 (dotted green)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30Companion SED [unitless]
z = 105
z = 102
z = 107
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
wavelength [nm]
0.05
0.00
0.05
Residuals
Fig. 10. Top: Profiles of the companion SED z for different levels of
the companion regularization ( µz = 102 in dashed orange, µz = 105
in blue, and µz = 107 in dotted green). Bottom: di fferences between
the profile for µz = 105 and the profiles for µz = 102 (dashed orange)
and µz = 107 (dotted green). For all these results, the stellar hyper-
parameters areµx = 10 andµy = 1.
Estimate (SURE, Stein 1981), the hierachical Bayesian method
(Molina 1994), or the L-curve (Hansen & O’Leary 1993) to men-
tion a few that could be used with our extraction algorithm. Im-
plementing and testing these methods for Exospeco is out of the
scope of this paper. However, since the companion SED found
by Exospeco does not strongly depend on the tuning of the stellar
regularization, our method is mostly driven by a single hyper-
parameter,µz, the level of the regularization for the companion
SED. This greatly reduces the complexity of tuning the Exospeco
algorithm.
5.3. Extraction of simulated spectrum in real data
To validate the E xospeco method, we injected the contribution
of a synthetic companion in existing SPHERE/IRDIS MRS data
d of the star HIP 65426 observed on 2019-05-20. Although
HIP 65426 star hosts a planet (Chauvin et al. 2017; Carter et al.
2022), the frame was selected for the derotation angles hiding the
planet outside the slit. The off-axis PSF h⊕ of the synthetic com-
panion follows the model in Eqs. (13) and (14c) with σ⊕ set to
match the diffraction limit of the telescope at the reference wave-
Article number, page 12 of 19

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
0 200 400 600 800
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
C
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
B
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
A
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Fig. 11. Scientific data of HIP 65426 with a synthetic companion whose
contrast isχ = 2 · 10−4 relative to the star and injected at angular sepa-
rationsρ⊕−ρ⋆ = 273 mas (A), 890 mas (B), and 1353 mas (C) indicated
by the arrows.
lengthλref and with different angular positionsρ⊕ on the side of
the coronagraphic mask where no companion was detected. The
ground truth SED of the synthetic companion is zgt = χ xflux
where χ > 0 is the mean contrast of the companion relative to
the star (without a coronagraph) and xflux is the SED of the star
HIP 65426 calibrated as explained in Appendix B. We use a con-
stant contrast for all wavelengths (i.e., the SED of the star and
of the companion are the same, up to the contrast χ). Figure 11
shows examples of generated data with a synthetic companion
whose contrast with respect to the star is χ = 2 · 10−4 and which
is injected at different angular separationsρ⊕−ρ⋆.
To assess the quality of the extracted companion’s SED ˆz,
we compute the following relative error:
q =
PNz
j=1
zgt, j− ˆz j

PNz
j=1
zgt, j

. (36)
In the following tests, the value of µz, the regularization level
of the companion’s SED, has been tuned so as to minimize the
relative error q. Figure 12 plots the relative error q for synthetic
companions injected at angular separationsρ⊕−ρ⋆ ranging from
200 mas to 1850 mas and with contrasts χ = 3 · 10−5, 2 · 10−4,
and 2 · 10−3. Clearly, the quality of the recovered SEDs degrades
as the companion gets closer to the mask. This is expected be-
cause, when getting closer to the mask, not only are the stellar
leakages brighter (hence causing more photon noise in the resid-
uals) but the approximation by the assumed o ff-axis PSF model
also worsens. For angular separations larger than∼ 600 mas and
for all considered contrasts, the quality of the recovered SEDs
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
angular separation [mas]
10 2
10 1
100
101
q
3.0e-5
0.0002
0.002
mask
A B C
Fig. 12. Relative error q defined in Eq. (36) for synthetic companions
injected in the scientific data of HIP 65426 (with the same spectra as the
host star) as a function of the angular separationρ⊕−ρ⋆ and for contrasts
χ = 3 · 10−5 (blue), 2 · 10−4 (orange), and 2 · 10−2 (green). The grayed
area represents the region invalidated by the coronagraphic mask. The
angular separations of the three cases presented in Fig. 11 are high-
lighted by the dashed lines labeled A, B, and C.
improves as the separation increases until a plateau is reached at
ρ⊕−ρ⋆∼ 1400 mas where the dominant source of nuisance is
the readout noise.
Figure 13 shows examples of recovered companion SEDs ˆz
at angular separationsρ⊕−ρ⋆ = 273 mas (A), 890 mas (B), and
1353 mas (C) for the same contrasts χ as in Fig. 12. Figure 13
confirms that the relative error q does reflect the ability of our
method to reliably recover the companion SED. When q≤ 0.1
(the green curves for angular separations B and C and the orange
curve for angular separation C), all the features of the SED are
correctly recovered. For q ∼ 0.2 (the green curve for case A,
the orange curve for case B, and the blue curve for case C), the
global shape of the SED is restored but with small spectral fea-
tures smoothed out and some photometric biases. These cases
prove that it is possible to extract a coarse but still exploitable
SED for bright companions quite close to the mask, typically
χ≥ 10−3 forρ⊕−ρ⋆∼ 250 mas, from a single MRS exposure.
The angular separation must be larger for fainter companions;
for example,ρ⊕−ρ⋆≥ 1200 mas forχ∼ 2 · 10−5. The photomet-
ric biases in the most di fficult cases (the green curve in case A,
the orange one in case B, and the blue one in case C) clearly indi-
cates that the removal of the modeled stellar contribution leaves
non-negligible residuals compared to the companion. A possi-
ble improvement could be to use a more complex model of the
on-axis PSF and consider more than one mode in the series ex-
pansion of Eq. (3).
To summarize the performances of the current version of Ex-
ospeco for a single data frame of the HIP 65426 observations,
Fig. 14 plots the minimal contrast needed to achieve a given rel-
ative error q as a function of the angular separation. The figure
shows that by tolerating a relative error as high asq = 0.3, a com-
panion with a contrast up toχ∼ 2 · 10−5 can be characterized. In
our conclusions, we explain how to extend E xospeco to jointly
process several data frames in order to increase the sensitivity of
the algorithm.
Article number, page 13 of 19

<<<PAGE 14>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
100
SED [unitless]
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
wavelength [nm]
0.0
0.2
z z gt
max(zgt)
A
10 2
10 1
100
SED [unitless]
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
wavelength [nm]
0.2
0.0
z z gt
max(zgt)
B
10 2
10 1
100
SED [unitless]
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
wavelength [nm]
0.2
0.0
0.2
z z gt
max(zgt)
C
Fig. 13. Examples of recovered companion SEDs ˆz in the same condi-
tions as in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 for synthetic companions injected at an-
gular separationsρ⊕−ρ⋆ = 273 mas (A), 890 mas (B), and 1353 mas (C)
with contrasts χ = 3 · 10−5 (blue curves), 2 · 10−4 (orange curves), and
2 · 10−2 (green curves). The ground truth SED zgt is plotted in dashed
lines. The normalized residuals are plotted below each panel.
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
angular separation [mas]
10 5
10 4
10 3
q = 10 1
q = 2.10 1
q = 3.10 1
Fig. 14. Minimal contrastχ required to achieve a given relative error q
as a function of the angular separation. The conditions are the same as
in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12.
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Wavelength [nm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3Companion SED [unitless]
Exospeco
TSVD
Fig. 15. Comparison of the SEDs extracted from the HR 3549 data by
Exospeco and by a standard TSVD method. See text for details.
5.4. Comparison with TSVD extraction
We compared E xospeco to a standard approach based on the
TSVD method described in Section 2.2 to remove the stellar
leakages. Figure 15 shows the companion SED extracted from
the HR 3549 data by Exospeco and by the TSVD approach. For
the latter method, the SED of the companion was extracted by lo-
cal averaging in a 7 pixel height sliding window along the com-
panion signal in the residual image given by Eq. 7 and shown in
Fig. 3. In both cases, the same complex calibration model of the
spectral and angular dispersion laws described in Appendix A
has been used. In spite of this identical calibration, the two ex-
tracted SEDs are notably different. Thanks to the optimal extrac-
tion in the maximum likelihood sense and to the spectral regu-
larization, the SED extracted by E xospeco is smoother and less
noisy. At a coarser resolution, the two SEDs display quite dif-
ferent spectral features. However, without a known ground truth,
the two SEDs cannot be ranked. For this reason, we also com-
pared the results given by the two methods on a synthetic injec-
tion done as described in Section 5.3. Figure 16 clearly demon-
strates that not only does E xospeco produce less noisy results,
but that they also better reflect reality.
6. Conclusion
In this paper we presented a novel algorithm, E xospeco, to ex-
tract the spectrum of a companion from high-contrast long-slit
spectroscopic data. The most challenging part of such a process-
Article number, page 14 of 19

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Wavelength [nm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Companion SED [unitless]
Exospeco
TSVD
Ground truth
Fig. 16. Comparison of the SEDs extracted from semi-synthetic data
by Exospeco and by a standard TSVD method. The angular separation
and the contrast of the injected companion are respectively ρ⊕−ρ⋆ =
785 mas andχ = 2×10−4. The green dashed curve represents the ground
truth injected spectrum which is that of HIP 65426 multiplied byχ.
ing is to disentangle the signal of interest from the stellar leak-
ages which are much brighter. Compared to existing methods,
our algorithm avoids any transform of the data, whether it is to
align the speckles of the stellar leakages at all wavelengths or to
fix defective pixels. E xospeco has also the advantage of jointly
extracting the parameters describing the stellar leakages (the star
spectrum and the on-axis PSF), the companion spectrum, the off-
axis PSF, and, optionally, some calibration parameters. By using
non-uniform statistical weights for the data pixels, our approach
is optimal in the maximum likelihood sense, it takes into account
all available measurements and consistently treats defective pix-
els as missing data. The joint optimization problem having no
closed-form solution, we proposed an alternating minimization
strategy which has proven to be effective. In spite of the numer-
ous parameters coming into play in the algorithm, the outputs
of the method are, in practice, mostly driven by a single hyper-
parameter that tunes the level of regularization of the companion
SED.
Although it is not directly part of the spectrum extraction al-
gorithm, we have shown that careful calibration of the instru-
ment is critical to get rid of the contamination by the stellar
leakages. For that purpose, we described a refined calibration
method of the spectral and spatial dispersion laws from avail-
able calibration data. In particular, SPHERE /LSS data present
a misalignment of the principal directions of dispersion with the
detector axes as well as a geometrical shear. If not accounted for,
we show that these distortions have a detrimental impact on the
result of the processing, whether it is by Exospeco or by the cur-
rent state-of-the-art method. A few remaining calibration param-
eters that may depend on the observing conditions, such as the
off-axis PSF size and the precise locations of the star and of the
companion along the slit, can be optionally adjusted by a self-
calibration procedure built into Exospeco. Thanks to this calibra-
tion step, our method significantly reduces the self-subtracting
bias by better disentangling the stellar leakages component from
the companion component.
A Julia (Bezanson et al. 2017) implementation of E x-
ospeco is freely available at https://github.com/SJJThe/
Exospeco, while an implementation of the calibration method
described in Section 4 and Appendix A is at https://github.
com/SJJThe/ExospecoCalibration.
Based on tests carried on empirical long-slit spectroscopic
data and on injections of a synthetic companion signal in these
data, we demonstrated that the proposed approach e ffectively
avoids the self-subtraction bias, even very close to the corona-
graphic mask. We provided curves to predict the minimal con-
trast required to achieve a given quality of extraction of the com-
panion SED. Reliable extraction of a companion SED can be
achieved from a single data frame at contrasts as low as a few
10−5. The proposed method could boost the characterization of
known (faint) exoplanets at a spectral resolution substantially
higher than currently possible with SPHERE IFS ( R∼ 35− 50)
and for contrasts much better than achievable with IRDIS MRS
using state of the art methods. By capturing more efficiently the
stellar contamination, the method we propose does not require
independent and thus imperfect calibration of the speckles by
rotating the slit to hide the planet signal. This will typically gain
at least 50% telescope time while reaching, and even surpassing,
the same contrast limit. This new method also paves the way
to combining polarimetry and spectroscopic measurements with
IRDIS LSS mode (R. Holstein private communication).
Being based on an inverse problems framework, Exospeco is
very flexible and can be adapted to various kinds of data (such as
data sequences or data from other instruments). An example of
such an extension of Exospeco is the joint processing of multiple
frames that can be done as follows. Assuming T LSS exposures
d1 to dT of the same object are collected during a night, they can
be combined into a single criterion that extends Eq. (17):
C(x, y1, y2,..., yT, z,ν,µ)
=
TX
t=1
dt− m(x, yt, z,ν)
2
Wt
+µxRx(xt)
+µy
TX
t=1
Ry(yt) +µzRz(z), (37)
where the statistical independence of noise between frames is
considered (a natural assumption). This criterion can be mini-
mized in x, y1, . . . , yT , z, and ν following the same alternating
method as described in Section 3.4, only with more steps in or-
der to estimate the on-axis PSF at each of the T frames. Such
a joint processing has the potential to improve the estimation of
companion SEDs and push further the achievable contrast limit.
Finally, to better disentangle the stellar leakages from the
companion spectrum, the model of the on-axis PSF could be
improved by taking into account more spatial modes of the se-
ries expansion in Eq. (3). Indeed, as demonstrated in Devaney &
Thiébaut (2017), accounting for more such modes significantly
improves the modeling of the stellar leakages, especially near the
coronagraphic mask. Such an improvement would not call into
question the founding principles of Exospeco, but would require
to adapt the optimization strategy.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Action Spécifique Haute
Résolution Angulaire (ASHRA) of CNRS/INSU co-funded by CNES. SPHERE
is an instrument designed and built by a consortium consisting of IPAG (Greno-
ble, France), MPIA (Heidelberg, Germany), LAM (Marseille, France), LESIA
(Paris, France), Laboratoire Lagrange (Nice, France), INAF - Osservatorio di
Padova (Italy), Observatoire de Genève (Switzerland), ETH Zürich (Switzer-
land), NOV A (Netherlands), ONERA (France) and ASTRON (Netherlands) in
collaboration with ESO. SPHERE was funded by ESO, with additional contri-
butions from CNRS (France), MPIA (Germany), INAF (Italy), FINES (Switzer-
land) and NOV A (Netherlands). SPHERE also received funding from the Eu-
ropean Commission Sixth and Seventh Framework Programmes as part of the
Optical Infrared Coordination Network for Astronomy (OPTICON) under grant
number RII3-Ct-2004-001566 for FP6 (2004-2008), grant number 226604 for
FP7 (2009-2012) and grant number 312430 for FP7 (2013-2016).
References
Berdeu, A., Soulez, F., Denis, L., Langlois, M., & Thiébaut, É. 2020, A&A, 635,
A90
Beuzit, J. L., Vigan, A., Mouillet, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A155
Article number, page 15 of 19

<<<PAGE 16>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
Bezanson, J., Edelman, A., Karpinski, S., & Shah, V . B. 2017, SIAM Review,
59, 65
Brent, R. 2013, Algorithms for Minimization Without Derivatives, Dover Books
on Mathematics (Dover Publications)
Carter, A. L., Hinkley, S., Kammerer, J., et al. 2022, The JWST Early Release
Science Program for Direct Observations of Exoplanetary Systems I: High
Contrast Imaging of the Exoplanet HIP 65426 b from 2-16 µm
Catmull, E. & Rom, R. 1974, in Computer Aided Geometric Design, ed. R. E.
BARNHILL & R. F. RIESENFELD (Academic Press), 317–326
Chauvin, G., Desidera, S., Lagrange, A.-M., et al. 2017, Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 605, L9
Dallant, J., Langlois, M., Thiébaut, É. M., & Flasseur, O. 2022, in Adaptive
Optics Systems VIII, ed. D. Schmidt, L. Schreiber, & E. Vernet (SPIE)
Devaney, N. & Thiébaut, É. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 472, 3734
Dohlen, K., Langlois, M., Saisse, M., et al. 2008, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, V ol. 7014, Ground-based
and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy II, ed. I. S. McLean & M. M.
Casali, 70143L
Eckart, C. & Young, G. 1936, Psychometrika, 1, 211
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2020a, Astronomy & As-
trophysics, 637, A9
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2020b, Astronomy & As-
trophysics, 634, A2
Flasseur, O., Denis, L., Thiébaut, É., & Langlois, M. 2018, Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 618, A138
Golub, G. H., Heath, M., & Wahba, G. 1979, Technometrics, 21, 215
Hansen, P. C. & O’Leary, D. P. 1993, SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 14, 1487
Jovanovic, N., Martinache, F., Guyon, O., et al. 2015, Publications of the Astro-
nomical Society of the Pacific, 127, 890
Lafreniere, D., Marois, C., Doyon, R., Nadeau, D., & Artigau, E. 2007, The
Astrophysical Journal, 660, 770
Lawson, C. L. & Hanson, R. J. 1974, Solving Least Squares Problems (Prentice-
Hall)
Macintosh, B., Graham, J., Palmer, D., et al. 2006, in Advances in Adaptive
Optics II, V ol. 6272, SPIE, 177–188
Macintosh, B., Graham, J. R., Ingraham, P., et al. 2014, proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 111, 12661
Mahalanobis, P. C. 1936, in Proceedings of the National Institute of Sciences of
India, V ol. II, 49–55
Marois, C., Correia, C., Véran, J.-P., & Currie, T. 2013, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Astronomical Union, 8, 48
Mesa, D., Vigan, A., D´Orazi, V ., et al. 2016, A&A, 593, A119
Mirsky, L. 1960, Quarterly J. Math., 11, 50
Molina, R. 1994, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence, 16, 1122
Mugnier, L., Fusco, T., & Conan, J.-M. 2004, Journal of the Optical Society of
America. A, Optics, image science, and vision, 21, 1841
Mugnier, L. M., Cornia, A., Sauvage, J.-F., et al. 2009, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 26,
1326
Powell, M. 2009, Technical Report, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics
Powell, M. J. D. 2006, in Nonconvex Optimization and Its Applications, ed.
G. Di Pillo & M. Roma (Springer Science), 255–297
Smith, I., Ferrari, A., & Carbillet, M. 2009, IEEE Trans. Signal Process., 57, 904
Soummer, R., Pueyo, L., & Larkin, J. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 755, L28
Sparks, W. B. & Ford, H. C. 2002, The Astrophysical Journal, 578, 543–564
Stein, C. M. 1981, The Annals of Statistics, 9, 1135–1151
Thé, S., Thiébaut, É., Denis, L., & Soulez, F. 2020, in 28th European Signal
Processing Conference, EUSIPCO 2020, Amsterdam, Netherlands, January
18-21, 2021 (IEEE), 2358–2362
Thiébaut, É. 2002, in Astronomical Data Analysis II, ed. J.-L. Starck & F. D.
Murtagh, V ol. 4847, SPIE, Bellingham, Washington, 174–183
Thiébaut, É., Devaney, N., Langlois, M., & Hanley, K. 2016, in Adaptive Op-
tics Systems V , ed. E. Marchetti, L. M. Close, & J.-P. Véran (SPIE-Intl Soc
Optical Eng)
Tikhonov, A. N. & Arsenin, V . I. 1977, Solutions of ill-posed problems/ Andrey
N. Tikhonov and Vasiliy Y . Arsenin ; translation editor, Fritz John (Winston ;
distributed solely by Halsted Press Washington : New York), xiii, 258 p. :
Titterington, D. M. 1985, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 144, 381
Vigan, A. 2016, SILSS: SPHERE /IRDIS Long-Slit Spectroscopy pipeline, As-
trophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1603.001
Vigan, A., Bonnefoy, M., Chauvin, G., Moutou, C., & Montagnier, G. 2012,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 540, A131
Vigan, A., Langlois, M., Moutou, C., & Dohlen, K. 2008, A&A, 489, 1345
Xie, C., Choquet, E., Vigan, A., et al. 2022, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 666,
A32
Article number, page 16 of 19

<<<PAGE 17>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
Appendix A: Calibration of the spectro-angular
dispersion laws
This appendix provides some details about the methods used for
the calibration of the spectro-angular laws described in Section 4
and some figures to support the results discussed in Section 4.5.
The considered calibration data dcal is the image in the central
panel of Fig. 5.
Appendix A.1: T ransverse projection
To locate the positions of the spectral lines, we compute a
weighted transverse projection of the calibration image dcal:
q⊥ k(ϕλ) =
P
i, jξ⊥ i, j,n(ϕλ) dcal,i, j
P
i, jξ⊥ i, j,n(ϕλ) , (A.1a)
with weights given by:
ξ⊥ i, j,k(ϕλ) = wmsk,i, jφproj
 i sinϕλ + j cosϕλ− k (A.1b)
and for a projection angle ϕλ chosen so as to maximize the
peak values of the resulting projection (plotted in red in the top
panel of Fig. 5 for ϕλ ≈ 0◦). In practice, we take φproj(t) =
max(1−| t|, 0), the linear B-spline, as the interpolating function
for the projection. Note that, thanks to the weighting by the mask
of valid pixelswmsk defined in Eq. (30), invalid pixels have no in-
cidence on the computed projection.
Appendix A.2: Detection of the spectral peaks
We use Algorithm 4 with tolerance parameter δ⊥ = 10 pixels
to find the Nλ most significant peaks in the transverse projection
q⊥(ϕλ)∈ RNq computed according to Eq. (A.1).
Algorithm 4: Find the most significant peaks
Input: Nλ, q⊥(ϕλ), andδ⊥.
Output:P(ϕλ).
P← ∅ ◁ start with an empty list
z = q⊥(ϕλ) ◁ copy profile in workspace array
forℓ = 1,..., Nλ do
kℓ = arg maxk zk ◁ find position of largest value in z
P←P∪ {kℓ} ◁ update list of positions
for k∈ Jmax(1, kℓ−δ⊥), min(kℓ +δ⊥, Nq)K do
zk←−∞ ◁ invalidate nearby pixels
returnP
Appendix A.3: Extraction of the paths of the spectral lines
Given the projection angle ϕλ and the listP(ϕλ) of the Nλ most
significant peaks in the transverse projection q⊥(ϕλ), we build
theℓ-th spectral pathCℓ as a list of points along theℓ-th spectral
line. The coordinates ipath
ℓ,m, jpath
ℓ,m
 of the m-th such point are given
by computing the center of gravity of the calibration data in a
small rectangular windowWℓ,m(ϕλ) sliding along the considered
spectral lines:
 ipath
ℓ,m, jpath
ℓ,m
 =
P
(i, j)∈Wℓ,m(ϕλ) wmsk,i, j× (i, j)
P
(i, j)∈Wℓ,m(ϕλ) wmsk,i, j
(A.2)
computed for all non-empty10 sliding windowWℓ,m of size∼ 1
pixel along the spectral line and 2δ⊥ + 1 pixels in the perpendic-
ular direction:
Wℓ,m(ϕλ) =

(i, j)∈ J1, IK× J1, JK such thati sinϕλ + j cosϕλ− kℓ
≤δ⊥ + 1
2
and
i cosϕλ− j sinϕλ− m
≤ 1
2
 (A.3)
where kℓ is theℓ-th index in the listP(ϕλ) of the Nλ most signif-
icant peaks in the transverse projection q⊥(ϕλ). Again note that,
thanks to the weighting by the mask of valid pixels, invalid pix-
els have no incidence on the computed coordinates. In practice,
we use the same value for the half-width of the sliding windows
and for the minimal separation between peaks in the transverse
projection, that is δ⊥ = 10 pixels for the considered calibration
data.
Appendix A.4: Detection of the edges of the spectral bands
Given the projection angle ϕλ and the listP(ϕλ) of the Nλ most
significant peaks in the transverse projection q⊥(ϕλ), we com-
pute the longitudinal profile of each spectral line as a the follow-
ing weighted projection:
q//ℓ,k(ϕλ) =
P
(i, j)∈Dℓ(ϕλ)ξ//i, j,k(ϕλ) dcal,i, j
P
(i, j)∈Dℓ(ϕλ)ξ//i, j,k(ϕλ) (A.4a)
with weights given by:
ξ//i, j,k(ϕλ) = wmsk,i, jφproj(i cosϕλ− j sinϕλ− k), (A.4b)
and where k is the index along the projection andDℓ(ϕλ) is a nar-
row rectangular window (in green in the central panel of Fig. 5)
to isolate the pixels of the calibration image dcal impacted by the
considered spectral line:
Dℓ(ϕλ) =
( (i, j)∈ J1, IK× J1, JK such thati sinϕλ + j cosϕλ− kℓ
≤δ⊥ + 1
2
)
(A.5)
with, as before,δ⊥≈ 10 pixels the half-width of the region.
Detecting the edges of the central hole due to the corona-
graphic mask in the resulting profile (plotted in green in the left
panel of Fig. 5) can be done by a quite simple procedure. Each
value at index k of the profile is compared with the next one up
to a threshold valueτ. If q//ℓ,k ⩽τ ⩽ q//ℓ,k+1 and q//ℓ,k < q//ℓ,k+1,
then an ascending edge is detected. If q//ℓ,k ⩾ τ ⩾ q//ℓ,k+1 and
q//ℓ,k > q//ℓ,k+1, it is a descending edge. From the four edges
detected in the ℓ-th spectral line (indicated by the crosses in the
left panel of Fig. 5), the second and third ones correspond to the
coronagraphic mask. Retrieving these edges inCℓ(ϕλ) yields the
coordinates  idown
ℓ , jdown
ℓ
 and  iup
ℓ , jup
ℓ
 required in Section 4.4 for
the calibration of the angular dispersion law.
Appendix A.5: Results on the calibration data
The results of the proposed calibration models are displayed in
Fig. A.1, as blue lines for the spectral law and green lines for the
spatial law. In practice, degrees Pλ = 5 and Pρ = 1 (limited by
the small number of points forρ) were chosen. The three models
described in Section 4.2 are tested, that is a standard model, one
of a medium complexity and one more complex.
As can be seen on the different zooms shown in Fig. A.2, 2D
polynomials are needed to explain local distortions. Choosing
this model, we plot on Fig. A.3 some iso-wavelength (blue) and
10 in the sense that it contains at least one valid pixel
Article number, page 17 of 19

<<<PAGE 18>>>
Pre-print version, article under review
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000Standard calibration
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000Medium calibration
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000Complex calibration
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Fig. A.1. Iso-wavelength curves at the wavelengths of the calibration
sources (blue lines) and iso-angular distance of the center of the coron-
agraphic mask of (green lines) presented on top of the calibration data
dcal. The upper panel presents the results for the simple model, the cen-
tral panel shows the results for the medium model, while the bottom
panel shows the results of using the complex model.
iso-angular distance (green) curves, on a zoom in of the HR3549
dataset. This figure highlights how well our proposed models
for the dispersion laws are following the speckles, compared to
the standard model. A strong shear e ffect due to the dispersive
Standard calibration
Medium calibration
Complex calibration
Fig. A.2. Magnified images of the two regions outlined by the yellow
and purple rectangles for the three models described in Section 4.2. To
best see the differences between models, the magnifications are different
in the two dimensions.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Fig. A.3. Iso-wavelength and iso-angular distance superposed to the
HR 3549 data observed on 2015-12-28 with IRDIS in MRS mode.
elements is visible and taken into account by our model. For all
these models, we took polynomials of degreesPλ = 5 and Pρ = 1
for the spectral and spatial dispersion laws.
Appendix B: Calibration of the contrast
In order to express the SED of the companion in terms of con-
trast with respect to the star, we use specific calibration datadflux
(shown in Fig. B.1 top) for which the star is placed in the spec-
trograph slit but shifted away from the coronagraphic mask and
with a neutral density inserted in the optical path to avoid detec-
tor saturation. Applying FitCompanion (Algorithm 2) to dflux and
dividing the resulting SED by the spectral transmission of the
neutral filter yields the SED of the star xflux (shown in Fig. B.1
bottom). The so derived parameters of the o ff-axis PSF can be
later used in FitCompanion (Algorithm 2) to extract the compan-
ion SED.
Article number, page 18 of 19

<<<PAGE 19>>>
Samuel Thé et al.: Characterization of stellar companion from high-contrast long-slit spectroscopy data
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
wavelength [nm]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000SED [ADU]
Fig. B.1. Calibration of the SED of the star HIP 65426. Top: Cali-
bration image dflux observed on 2019-05-20 with the MRS mode of
SPHERE/IRDIS. Bottom: SED of the star extracted by F itStar (Al-
gorithm 2) and corrected from the density filter.
Appendix C: Exploiting the scaling indetermination
The estimated components ˆx, ˆy, ˆz, and ˆν of the direct model
defined in Eq. (15) depend on hyper-parameters which include
the regularization weights µx, µy, and µz. In this Appendix, we
show how to adapt the approach of Thé et al. (2020) to reduce the
effective number of regularization parameters and also accelerate
the minimization.
We first note that the regularizations considered for the stel-
lar components are homogeneous functions of degree 2, i.e. the
following property holds:
Ru(α u) =α2Ru(u), (C.1)
whatever the component u = x or y considered andα≥ 0.
The contribution of the star, the first right-hand side term in
Eq. (15), is a bilinear function of the parameters x and y. As a
consequence:
m(α x, y/α, z,ν) = m(x, y, z,ν), (C.2)
holds for any scaling factorα> 0.
Combining the properties in Eqs. (C.1) and (C.2) with the
definition of the objective function in Eq. (17) and that of the
regularization in Eq. (19), it can be seen that for anyα> 0:
C(α x, y/α, z,ν,µ x,µ y,µ z) =C(x, y, z,ν,α 2µx,α−2µy,µ z).
(C.3)
In other words, scaling the unknowns x and y without changing
the model is equivalent to scaling their regularization weights.
Exploiting this, it is possible to compute an optimal scaling fac-
tor:
ˆα(x, y,µ x,µ y) = arg min
α>0
C(α x, y/α, z,ν,µ x,µ y,µ z)
= arg min
α>0
C(x, y, z,ν,α 2µx,α−2µy,µ z)
= arg min
α>0
n
α2µxRx(x) +α−2µyRy(y)
o
=
 µyRy(y)
µxRx(x)
! 1
4
. (C.4)
Plugging this expression in the definition of the criterion yields:
C+(x, y, z,ν,µ x,µ y,µ z)
= min
α>0
C(α x, y/α, z,ν,µ x,µ y,µ z)
=∥d− m(x, y, z,ν)∥2
W +µx,yRx,y(x, y) +µzRz(z) (C.5)
where:
Rx,y(x, y) =
q
Rx(x)Ry(y), (C.6)
and:
µx,y = 2√µxµy. (C.7)
This shows that the regularizations of the stellar components x
and y are entangled and that the e ffect of these regularizations
on the shape of these components is e ffectively controlled by a
single hyper-parameter, here µx,y. As shown by Eq. (C.4), the
ratioµx/µy of the hyper-parameters controls the scaling, not the
shape, of x and y, one of the two can be fixed. This saves us the
hassle of adjusting both parameters at the same time.
Article number, page 19 of 19