<<<PAGE 1>>>
Preprint typeset using L ATEX style emulateapj v. 12/16/11
DETECTING EXOMOONS VIA DOPPLER MONITORING OF DIRECTLY IMAGED EXOPLANETS
Andrew V anderburg1,†, Saul A. Rappaport 2, and Andrew W. Mayo 3,4
ABSTRACT
Recently, Teachey, Kipping, and Schmitt (2018) reported the detection of a candidate exomoon,
tentatively designated Kepler-1625b I, around a giant planet in the Kepler ﬁeld. The candidate
exomoon would be about the size and mass of Neptune, considerably larger than any moon in our Solar
System, and if conﬁrmed, would be the ﬁrst in a new class of giant moons or binary planets. Motivated
by the large mass ratio in theKepler-1625b planet and satellite system, we investigate the detectability
of similarly massive exomoons around directly imaged exoplanets via Doppler spectroscopy. The
candidate moon around Kepler-1625b would induce a radial velocity signal of about 200 m s−1 on its
host planet, large enough that similar moons around directly imaged planets orbiting bright, nearby
stars might be detected with current or next generation instrumentation. In addition to searching
for exomoons, a radial velocity survey of directly imaged planets could reveal the orientations of the
planets’ spin axes, making it possible to identify Uranus analogs.
Subject headings: planetary systems, planets and satellites: detection
1. INTRODUCTION
Exomoons, or moons orbiting planets around stars
other than our own Sun, are hard to detect. It is a
challenge, in fact, to even detect the extrasolar planets
which might host these moons – only in the last three
decades has astronomical instrumentation advanced to
the point where exoplanets could be conﬁdently claimed
(Campbell et al. 1988; Latham et al. 1989; Wolszczan &
Frail 1992; Mayor & Queloz 1995). Exoplanets are of-
ten detected by measuring small signals in light coming
from their host stars – such as low-amplitude periodic
modulations in the radial velocity (RV) of the host star
(e.g. Mayor & Queloz 1995), small dimmings in the host
star’s brightness as the planet transits, passing in front
of the star in our line of sight (e.g. Charbonneau et al.
2009), or perturbations to the gravitational potential in a
system from a planet, illuminated through gravitational
microlensing (e.g. Bond et al. 2004). In rare cases, it
is possible to actually take images (and spectra) of a
planet by angularly resolving the planet and the star
using adaptive optics (AO) imaging (e.g. Marois et al.
2008). Advances in adaptive optics and the next genera-
tion of extremely large telescopes promise to make these
directly imaged planets more common (e.g. Quanz et al.
2015).
Detecting exomoons orbiting these planets adds an ex-
tra level of diﬃculty because, in general, moons con-
tribute only tiny perturbations on top of the already
small signals caused by exoplanets. So far, there are nu-
merous proposed methods for detecting exomoons, rang-
ing from measuring photocenter motion of a directly im-
aged but unresolved planet/moon system (Cabrera &
1 Department of Astronomy, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
2 Department of Physics, and Kavli Institute for Astrophysics
and Space Research, M.I.T., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3 DTU Space, National Space Institute, Technical University
of Denmark, Elektrovej 327, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
4 Centre for Star and Planet Formation, Natural History Mu-
seum of Denmark & Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copen-
hagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, DK-1350 Copenhagen K.
† NASA Sagan Fellow, avanderburg@utexas.edu
Schneider 2007; Agol et al. 2015), to detecting tran-
sits of self-luminous planets by their moons 6 (Cabrera &
Schneider 2007), to observing changes in the polarization
signature of giant exoplanets (Sengupta & Marley 2016).
Today, however, the most sensitive searches for exomoons
look for small perturbations to transit light curves from
stars hosting giant transiting planets (e.g. Kipping et al.
2013, 2015b; Hippke 2015; Teachey et al. 2018). A moon
orbiting a transiting planet would cause small variations
in the timing and duration of transits of the planet across
the stellar host (Sartoretti & Schneider 1999; Kipping
2009). Moons would also block starlight themselves, per-
turbing the shape of transits and potentially increasing
the total transit duration. It is possible to identify ex-
omoon candidates by detecting changes to the average
shape of the host planets’ transits (Heller 2014), but the
most sophisticated searches for exomoons today involve
full photo-dynamical modeling of light curves of stars
hosting transiting planets using specialized codes (Kip-
ping et al. 2012).
Recently, Teachey et al. (2018) reported perhaps the
strongest yet exomoon candidate around a giant planet
in the Kepler ﬁeld, Kepler-1625b7. A photodynamical
ﬁt to three transits of the planet observed by Kepler
during its original mission suggests that the candidate
moon, Kepler-1625b I, is about the size and mass of Nep-
tune. While the detection is tentative, and historically,
exomoon candidates have not survived further scrutiny
(Cabrera et al. 2014; Kipping et al. 2015a), the candidate
around Kepler-1625b has so far passed standard tests in-
cluding cross-validation between diﬀerent data segments
and careful inspection of pixel-level Kepler data. The
inferred orbit of the moon is physically plausible, far
enough from the planet to avoid Roche lobe overﬂow,
and close enough to remain dynamically stable. Further-
6 If a moon is found to transit its planet, even more could be
learned by observing the Rossiter McLaughlin eﬀect as the moon
transits its host planet (Heller & Albrecht 2014).
7 Kepler-1625b was identiﬁed as a transiting planet candidate
by the Kepler pipeline (Mullally et al. 2015) and subsequently sta-
tistically validated by Morton et al. (2016).
arXiv:1805.01903v2  [astro-ph.EP]  11 Sep 2018

<<<PAGE 2>>>
2 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
TABLE 1
Summary of Relevant Radial Velocity Signals
Section Signal Self-Luminous Reﬂected-Light RV Timescale
Planets Planets Amplitude
2.1 Exomoon Reﬂex Motion Yes Yes Up to ∼ 1 km s−1 days to months
2.2 Planet Orbit Yes Yes ∼ 5− 50 km s−1 years to decades
2.3 Planetary Illumination No Yes Up to ∼ 10 km s−1 same as planet’s orbit
2.4 Planetary Activity Yes Yes (lower amplitude) Up to ∼100 m s−1 hours to days
2.5 Peak-pulling by Exomoon Maybe Yes similar to moon’s fraction of moon’s orbit
orbital motion near conjunction phases
2.6 Disk Clump Occultation Maybe No Up to ∼ 100 m s−1 Aperiodic variations
over days to weeks
more, the inferred masses of both the moon and planet
from the photodynamical ﬁt are consistent with empiri-
cally determined mass/radius relationships. The candi-
date signal was therefore compelling enough to warrant
follow-up observations with the Hubble Space Telescope,
which were executed in October 2017, and which may
either conﬁrm or refute the proposed moon scenario.
If the candidate exomoon around Kepler-1625b is con-
ﬁrmed by Hubble observations, it would be a historic dis-
covery. In addition to being the ﬁrst moon (or binary
planet, depending on one’s deﬁnition) discovered around
a planet outside our solar system, it would be the ﬁrst
in a new class of massive moons (Heller 2018), larger
than most of the planets known to exist in our galaxy
(Fressin et al. 2013). While a priori, the discovery of an
object so diﬀerent from anything found in our solar sys-
tem might seem unlikely, historically exoplanet searches
have yielded one surprising result after another, from hot
Jupiters (Mayor & Queloz 1995) to multi-planet systems
orbiting pulsars (Wolszczan & Frail 1992). These dis-
coveries have shown that searches in new regimes, even
for objects with no known analogs within our own solar
system, can bear fruit (Struve 1952).
Here, we propose that massive exomoons similar to
Kepler-1625b I might be detected by radial velocity mon-
itoring of directly imaged planets. Recently, signiﬁcant
progress has been made in detecting thermal light from
hot exoplanets using high-resolution near infrared spec-
trographs (Snellen et al. 2014; Bryan et al. 2018; Schwarz
et al. 2016; Hoeijmakers et al. 2018). The detection
of spectral features at high resolution makes it possi-
ble to measure the radial velocity of the planets them-
selves. While others have previously discussed detecting
exomoons with radial velocity observations of directly
imaged planets (Hook 2005; Cabrera & Schneider 2007;
Heller 2016; Lillo-Box et al. 2018), here we quantitatively
assess the various RV signals one might expect to detect
when observing directly imaged planets. This paper is
organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe and esti-
mate the RV signals induced by exomoons on their host
planets as well as other “nuisance” signals due to the
planets’ orbital motion, changes to the planets’ illumina-
tion, and inhomogeneities on the planets’ surfaces. We
ﬁnd that the signals of giant, Kepler-1625b I-like exo-
moons should either be easily separable from or domi-
nate over nuisance signals, making their detection astro-
physically plausible. In Section 3, we estimate the fea-
sibility of measuring radial velocities with high enough
precision to detect RV signals caused by massive orbit-
ing exomoons and conclude that massive moons could
be detected around bright directly imaged planets with
present-day instrumentation8. In Section 4, we discuss
the potential impact of a radial velocity exomoon search
and point out that a Doppler monitoring program aimed
at detecting exomoons would naturally yield interesting
additional results even if no exomoons are detected. Fi-
nally, in Section 5, we summarize our results and their
implications.
2. RELEVANT RADIAL VELOCITY SIGNALS
In this section we discuss the various radial velocity
signals which might be present in observations of directly
imaged giant planets. We summarize the diﬀerent signals
in Table 1 and show an example of how these signals
might present for a moon-hosting exoplanet imaged in
reﬂected light in Figure 1.
2.1. Reﬂex Motion from an Exomoon
A moon orbiting an exoplanet will induce a Keplerian
radial velocity reﬂex motion on the planet. The radial
velocity semiamplitude of the Keplerian signal, Kp, in-
duced by a moon with mass m$ on a planet with mass
mp is given by:
Kp =
[
2πG
P$(1−e2
$)3/2
m3
$ sin3i$
(mp +m$)2
]1/3
(1)
where G is Newton’s gravitational constant, e$ is the
orbital eccentricity, and i$ is the orbital inclination. If
we assume circular orbits and take the planet’s mass to
be much larger than the moon’s mass (mp >>m $), the
expression for the RV semiamplitude reduces to:
Kp≈
[ 2πG
Pm 2p
]1/3
m$ sini$ (2)
Table 2 lists the Solar System moons which induce
the largest RV semiamplitude on their host planet.
While most moons in the Solar System cause only low-
amplitude radial velocity reﬂex motion on their host
planets, a handful of the more massive moons (in par-
ticular, Charon and Earth’s moon) can induce signals of
tens of meters per second.
8 In particular, we show that detecting massive exomoons could
be feasible using a high-resolution infrared echelle spectrograph be-
hind a modern high-contrast adaptive optics system on an 8m class
telescope. While there is not yet such a spectrograph/AO combi-
nation, the major technical hurdles necessary for the observations
have been overcome.

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 3
0 100 200 300
Time (days)
−40
−20
0
20
40
Radial Velocity (km s−1 )
Planet Orbital Velocity
Moon−Induced Reflex Velocity
Planetary Illumination Effect
Total Radial Velocity
Fig. 1.— Simulated RV signals of a hypothetical directly imaged exoplanet illuminated by reﬂected light from its host star. The planet is
the mass and radius of Jupiter, and has a rotation period of 18 hours. The various components of the RV signal are shown as thin colored
lines, and the total RV signal for the planet is shown as a thick black line. The planet orbits a sun-like star in a 360 day period and hosts
a Neptune-mass exomoon in a 5 day orbit. The RV contribution due to the varying illumination of the planet is calculated for a planet
with an orbital inclination of 85 ◦, with the spin angle ξ =60◦. The planetary activity contribution for this particular planet, assuming
photometric variations similar to Neptune, is smaller than the width of the curves.
TABLE 2
Largest R V Signals From Solar System Moons
Moon Planet Orbital RV Semi-
Name Name Period (days) Amplitude (m s −1)
1. Charon Pluto 6.39 21.91
2. Moon Earth 27.32 12.46
3. Titan Saturn 15.95 1.32
4. Triton Neptune 5.88 0.92
5. Ganymede Jupiter 7.16 0.85
6. Io Jupiter 1.77 0.82
7. Callisto Jupiter 16.69 0.46
8. Europa Jupiter 3.55 0.35
9. Titania Uranus 8.71 0.14
10. Oberon Uranus 13.46 0.10
Note. — Moon data are taken from https://ssd.jpl.nasa.
gov/?sat_phys_par and https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/?sat_elem.
If real, the candidate exomoon around Kepler-1625b
would cause a far larger RV signal on its host planet than
the small moons in our Solar system. A Neptune-mass
moon orbiting a 10 MJ planet with a 1.8 day orbital pe-
riod9 like Kepler-1625b I should induce a radial velocity
signal on its host planet of Kp≈ 200 m s−1. While the
RV semi-amplitude induced by Kepler-1625b I is large,
it is by no means the extreme. If this same moon were
found orbiting a planet with the mass of Jupiter, it could
induce an RV semiamplitude as large as 900 m s−1, and
if the moon were orbiting near its Roche limit ( P≈ 10
hours), the RV semiamplitude could be boosted by an-
other 50%. Kepler-1625b I-like moons are not the only
9 The 1.8 day orbital period is estimated from the reported semi-
major axis and planet mass from the Teachey et al. (2018) photo-
dynamical ﬁts.
class which might induce large RV semiamplitudes; an
Earth-mass exomoon in a similar orbit around a Jupiter-
mass planet would induce a signal with an amplitude of
approximately 50 m s−1, while a rocky super-Earth-sized
moon (analogous to super-Earth planets like LHS 1140 b,
Dittmann et al. 2017) in a 2 day orbit around a Jupiter-
mass planet could induce a signal upwards of 300 m s−1.
In favorable conditions, rocky exomoons like these might
be habitable (Hill et al. 2018).
Thanks to advances in instrumentation and data pro-
cessing techniques (Butler et al. 1996; Mayor et al. 2003),
in the last few decades it has become possible to de-
tect RV signals with semiamplitudes as small as about
1 m s−1 (e.g. Motalebi et al. 2015) around stars brighter
than about V=10 th magnitude, and future instruments
are being designed with the goal of remaining stable at
the level of 10 cm s−1. While achieving RV precision of a
few meters per second or better in spectroscopic observa-
tions of directly imaged exoplanets is likely out of reach,
instrumental stability should not be a limiting factor in
RV searches for exomoons, which can induce RV varia-
tions considerably larger than those routinely detected
with precise Doppler spectroscopy.
The orbital periods of Solar System moons range
widely from the 7 hour orbits of Naiad about Neptune
and Metis around Jupiter to the Neso’s 27 year orbit
around Neptune, but the most massive moons tend to
have a more narrow range of orbital periods. Among the
17 Solar system moons with mass greater than 10 20 kg,
the orbital periods range from about 1.4 days to 80 days.
The estimated 1.8 day orbital period of Kepler-1625b I
also falls within this range.
2.2. Orbit about the Host Star

<<<PAGE 4>>>
4 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
Fig. 2.— Geometry used in analytic description of the planetary
illumination RV eﬀect. The planet is shown as a sphere being
illuminated by a light source along the X axis, which is observed
by an observer in the X−Y plane at angle α. The planet is
rotating with an angular momentum vector in the direction of the
Z axis; the color of the planet represents the line-of-sight projected
rotational velocity at each point on the surface. The integration
is performed over the polar angle θ and azimuthal angle φ. The
setup is adapted from that of Lester et al. (1979).
The short-period radial velocity signal of an exomoon
induced on its host planet will be overlaid on the longer-
period Keplerian radial velocity signal of the planets’ own
orbit around its host star. A planet’s radial velocity sig-
nal from its orbit about a star with mass M⋆ in an orbit
with period Po has a semi-amplitude Ko given by:
Ko≈
[2πGM⋆
Po
]1/3
sinio (3)
where io is the inclination of the planet’s orbit about
the host star. The amplitude of this signal is large;
for Kepler-1625b, the semiamplitude should be about 33
km s−1, and for the directly imaged planetβ Pictoris b10,
the semiamplitude should be about 13 km s −1. Because
this signal is strictly periodic and on a much longer pe-
riod than any moon signals, it will be straightforward to
model away the long-term orbital signal to detect short-
period moon signals. The typical orbital periods for di-
rectly imaged planets will be years to decades, far longer
than the typical moon orbital periods of days to weeks.
2.3. Planetary Illumination Eﬀect
Planets which are detected in reﬂected light (and are
not self-luminous) will show an additional long-period
signal as the host star’s light illuminates diﬀerent por-
tions of the planet’s surface, with diﬀerent local rota-
tional velocities, as viewed from Earth. Following Lester
et al. (1979), for a planet which reﬂects like a Lamber-
tian sphere being illuminated by a uniform light source
from the positiveX direction, the phase law Ψ(α), or the
amount of ﬂux reﬂected towards an observer at angle α
10 Using orbital parameters from Wang et al. (2016).
in the X−Y plane, is given by: 11
Ψ(α) = 3
2π
∫ π
0
sin3θdθ
∫ π/2
α−π/2
cosφ cos (α−φ)dφ (4)
whereθ is the polar spherical angle andφ is the azimuthal
spherical angle, as shown in Figure 2. Equation 4 is
only valid over the interval 0 ≤ α≤ π due to the way
the bounds of integration are deﬁned. To calculate the
phase function over the intervalπ≤α≤ 2π, the bounds
of the φ integral in Equation 4 must be changed so that
the integral is evaluated between φ = 3π/2 and φ =
α+π/2. When the integral is evaluated over these limits,
the result is:
Ψ(α) = sign (π−α)sin(α) + (π−α) cos(α)
π (5)
where sign (x) = 1 for x >0, sign (x) =−1 for x <0,
and sign (x) = 0 for x = 0. Equation 5 is valid over the
interval 0≤α≤ 2π.
The radial velocity signal due to planetary illumina-
tion can be calculated by modifying this phase function
by including a term describing the radial velocity of the
planet’s surface, vs, at every point ( θ,φ ). We calculate
the average vs over the same illuminated region of the
sphere:
RV(α) = 1
Ψ(α)
x
vs sin3 (θ) cos (φ) cos (φ−α)dφdθ
(6)
In the special case where the planet’s orbit is viewed
edge on (io = 90◦) and the rotational axis of the planet
is aligned with its orbital angular momentum, vs can be
written as:
vs =−veq sin (φ−α) sin (θ) (7)
where veq is the planet’s equatorial rotational speed.
Evaluating the integral gives:
RV(α) =veq sign (π−α) 3π sinα(cosα + 1)
16(sinα + (π−α) cosα) (8)
The illumination and radial velocity curves as a func-
tion of phase in this special case are shown in Figure 3. In
general, when planets are not viewed edge-on ( io⁄= 90◦)
and do not have spins which are aligned with their or-
bits, the illumination eﬀect is more complex and diﬃcult
to study analytically. We have developed a framework
to calculate the illumination RV eﬀect in general cases
numerically, which we describe in more detail in the Ap-
pendix. We show a handful of illustrative RV illumina-
tion curves in Figure 4.
Like the planet’s orbit, the planetary illumination RV
function is strictly periodic (on the planet’s orbital pe-
riod). The planetary illumination function can have
sharp/short timescale features, like the discontinuity
shown in Figure 3, but these sharp features typically take
place when the planet’s brightness is very low, making
11 The following expression is equivalent to Equation 34 of Lester
et al. (1979) multiplied by the normalization constant 3 /(2π).

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 5
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Orbital Phase
-20
-10
0
10
20
Radial Velocity (km s-1)
Radial Velocity
Illumination
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Fractional Illumination
Fig. 3.— Brightness and radial velocity signals due to partial illumination of a directly imaged exoplanet detected in reﬂected light. The
radial velocity signal due to the planetary illumination eﬀect as a function of the planet’s orbital phase is shown as a solid orange curve,
and the brightness of the planet is shown as a dashed purple curve. These curves assume the planet reﬂects like a Lambertian sphere, the
inclination of the planet’s orbit is io = 90◦, and the planet’s spin angular momentum is aligned with the orbital angular momentum (that
is,β =ξ = 0 using the deﬁnitions described in the Appendix). Above the curves are diagrams of the illumination of the planet at a handful
of orbital phases. The color on the planet’s surface shows the radial velocity, where blue is a velocity of −veq, white is a velocity of 0, and
red is a velocity of +veq.
them practically diﬃcult to see. The planetary illumina-
tion RV signal should therefore not signiﬁcantly compli-
cate the detection of exomoons.
2.4. Planetary Activity Signals
RV observations of directly imaged exoplanets would
also likely show spurious RV variations due to inhomo-
geneities on the planet rotating in and out of view. Sim-
ilar apparent RV variations have been observed and ex-
tensively studied on stars (Saar & Donahue 1997; Wright
2005; Dumusque et al. 2011a; Boisse et al. 2011; Aigrain
et al. 2012; Rajpaul et al. 2015; Haywood et al. 2016). On
stars, these variations are often referred to as “stellar ac-
tivity signals” because the surface inhomogeneities which
cause the variations, like starspots, faculae, or plage, are
usually the result of magnetic activity.
On the surface of a planet, inhomogeneities like clouds
or storms rotating in and out of view on a planet’s sur-
face may cause analogous “planetary activity signals”.
We can estimate the impact of planetary activity using
similar methods as used to estimate activity signals on
stars. The RV variation ∆R Vcaused by a dark spot with
ﬂux contrast Fspot rotating in and out of view on the
planet’s surface is approximated as:
∆R V≈Fspot×v sini (9)
where v sini is the planet’s projected rotational veloc-
ity. Giant solar system planets (Rowe et al. 2017) 12
12 The variability can be strongly wavelength-dependent (Gelino
& Marley 2000; Stauﬀer et al. 2016).
and brown dwarfs (see Wilson et al. 2014; Radigan 2014;
Biller et al. 2015; Metchev et al. 2015; Vos et al. 2018;
Artigau 2018, and references therein) can show variabil-
ity up to a few percent peak to peak, translating into
spot ﬁlling fractions of order a few percent. Combining
these photometric amplitudes with typical 13 planetary
rotational velocities up to 10-25 km s−1 gives RV varia-
tions with amplitudes up to a few hundred meters per
second peak to peak.
Like their stellar counterparts, planetary activity sig-
nals present as quasi-periodic radial velocity variability,
contributing strong signals at the planet’s rotation pe-
riod and its harmonics. We estimate the form of a plan-
etary activity signal using the FF’ method developed by
Aigrain et al. (2012), which is a technique to predict the
radial velocity signal caused by dark spots rotating on
the surface of a star using photometric observations 14.
Highly precise and continuous photometric observations
of planets are rare, but recently, the planet Neptune was
observed by the K2 mission for about 50 days (Rowe
et al. 2017). We ﬁt the K2 light curve of Neptune with
a basis spline to smooth out high-frequency noise, and
calculate the expected planetary activity signals using
FF’. We show the spline-smoothed light curve and re-
13 Jupiter has a rotational velocity of about 12 km s −1, Saturn
has a rotational velocity of about 10 km s−1, Uranus and Neptune
each have rotational velocities of about 2.5 km s−1, and β Pictoris
b has a rotational velocity of about 25 km s−1(Snellen et al. 2014).
14 The FF’ method also predicts RV variations on stars due to
the suppression of convective blueshift in active areas. Since this
phenomenon is unlikely to be important on directly imaged planets,
we ignore it here.

<<<PAGE 6>>>
6 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
Fig. 4.— Sample planetary illumination RV curves for diﬀerent spin and orbital orientations. The signal is speciﬁed by the planet’s
orbital inclination io and two angles ξ and β, which describe the orientation of the planet’s spin axis. These angles and geometry are
described in the Appendix. We have arbitrarily chosen the host planet to be about the size of Jupiter with a rotation period of 18 hours.
Above each of the curves are diagrams of the illumination of the planet at a handful of orbital phases. The color on the planet’s surface
shows the radial velocity, where blue is a velocity of −veq, white is a velocity of 0, and red is a velocity of + veq.
sulting planetary activity signal in Figure 5 for the case
of a Jupiter-sized planet with Neptune-like photometric
variability and a rotation period of 18 hours 15.
The above calculations and discussion are for the case
of self-luminous planets. Planets imaged in reﬂected light
will also present quasi-periodic radial velocity variations
on the timescale of the planetary rotation period, but
because only part of the planetary disk is illuminated,
these signals will have somewhat diﬀerent morphology
and lower amplitude.
While planetary activity could produce spurious RV
signals with about the same amplitude as the expected
RV signal for moons like Kepler-1625b I, planetary ac-
15 To simulate the activity signals for stars with diﬀerent rotation
periods, we scaled the time axis of the K2 observations by the ratio
between the desired rotation period and Neptune’s actual rotation
period of 16.1 days.
tivity should not prove prohibitive for detecting moons.
In many cases, it is possible to ﬁlter and separate ac-
tivity signals from center-of-mass radial velocity signals
when the timescales of these signals are somewhat diﬀer-
ent (e.g. Dumusque et al. 2011b; Haywood et al. 2014;
Vanderburg et al. 2016) 16. For rapidly rotating planets
which will induce the largest spurious RV signals, the ro-
tation periods (typically ∼ 10 hours, Biller et al. 2015;
Vos et al. 2018; Lew et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016) should
be shorter 17 than the orbital periods of most massive
16 It is most challenging to separate activity and center-of-mass
radial velocity signals when the orbital period is within about 10%
of the characteristic activity timescale or its harmonics (see Figure
4 of Vanderburg et al. 2016 and Figure 13 of Damasso et al. 2018).
17 Frequently, the dominant periods of RV activity signals are at
the ﬁrst or second harmonics of the rotation period (Vanderburg
et al. 2016), further separating the rotation signals from exomoon

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 7
      
0.98
0.99
1.00
1.01
1.02Relative Brightness
      
0.98
0.99
1.00
1.01
1.02Relative Brightness
Photometric Light Curve: Scatter = 0.6 %
0 2 4 6 8 10
Scaled Time (days)
−200
−100
0
100
200
Radial Velocity (m s−1 )
0 2 4 6 8 10
Scaled Time (days)
−200
−100
0
100
200
Radial Velocity (m s−1 ) Radial Velocity Activity Signal: Scatter = 26 m s−1
Fig. 5.— Simulated RV activity signal for a directly imaged planet. The top panel shows the spline-smoothed brightness of the planet
Neptune as a function of time (scaled so that the planet’s rotation period is 18 hours), as recorded by the K2 mission (Rowe et al.
2017). The bottom panel shows the planetary activity radial velocity signals calculated using the FF’ method (Aigrain et al. 2012). The
planetary activity signal is calculated assuming the planet is the radius of Jupiter, is self-luminous, and has an 18 hour rotation period.
The RMS scatter of the planetary activity signal is about 25 m s −1, but larger and more rapidly rotating planets like β Pictoris b can
induce higher-amplitude activity signals (see Figure 6).
exomoons, making it possible to eﬀectively ﬁlter away
the planetary activity (if RV observations are taken with
a high-enough cadence, Dumusque et al. 2011b; L´ opez-
Morales et al. 2016). These planetary activity signals
should also cause signiﬁcant changes to the shapes and
proﬁles of spectral lines 18, which can be used to diﬀer-
entiate activity signals from the signals of exomoons. It
should be possible to take advantage of techniques and
observing strategies being developed for mitigating stel-
lar activity for RV planet searches and apply them to RV
moons searches (e.g. Haywood et al. 2014; Rajpaul et al.
2015; Donati et al. 2016).
2.5. Peak-pulling by Light from the Exomoon
While detecting exomoons by Doppler monitoring of
directly imaged planets is in many ways similar to de-
tecting exoplanets by Doppler monitoring of stars, the
analogy is not perfect. One diﬀerence between detecting
exoplanets and exomoons with radial velocities is that
exomoons may be bright enough compared to their host
planets to contribute signiﬁcant light to the planetary
orbits.
18 These line shape diagnostics include the “bisector span”, a
measurement of the skew of the line, the average “full width at half
maximum” or FWHM width of the spectral features, and others
(Queloz et al. 2001; Dumusque et al. 2011c; Figueira et al. 2013).
Line shape diagnostics like these sometimes correlate with spurious
radial velocity signals caused by activity (see for example Figure 7
of Queloz et al. 2001). The bisector span is particularly useful for
particularly active stars with dark spots, a situation likely analo-
gous to the planetary activity considered here, while the FWHM is
more useful for quiet stars like the sun, and may be less sensitive to
the large planetary activity signals. Additional diagnostics might
be identiﬁed, or new techniques might be developed which can
translate spectral line shapes into spurious radial velocity signals.
See Collier Cameron (2017) for a recent review of the subject.
spectrum, which can perturb the measured radial veloc-
ity of the planet. This eﬀect, which is known as peak-
pulling, has been studied in the case of double-lined spec-
troscopic binary stars and has been shown to signiﬁcantly
aﬀect radial velocity measurements if not taken into ac-
count (Zucker & Mazeh 1994). Because exoplanets are
at least thousands (and often millions) of times fainter
than their host stars, this eﬀect can generally be ignored
for exoplanet detection.
In the case of a planet/moon system imaged in re-
ﬂected light, we can write the brightness ratioρb between
the planet and moon as:
ρb = αpr2
p
α$r2
$
(10)
whererp andαp are the radius and albedo of the planet,
and r$ and α$ are the radius and albedo of the moon.
Assuming similar albedos, a Jupiter-sized planet imaged
in reﬂected light will therefore only be about 8 times
brighter than its Neptune-sized exomoon, close enough
in brightness that the moon might signiﬁcantly aﬀect
the measured planetary radial velocity. If peak-pulling
is not accounted for in the radial velocity extraction,
the measured radial velocity (RV measured) will be the
brightness-weighted average of the radial velocity of the
planet (RVp) and moon (RV $):
RVmeasured = RVpρb + RV$
1 +ρb
(11)
The radial velocity of the moon about the center of
mass of the planet/moon system is a Keplerian function
with the same orbital parameters but opposite direction

<<<PAGE 8>>>
8 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
as the planet’s motion, with a semiamplitude:
K$ =Kp
mp
m$
(12)
If the contribution from the moon is not taken into
account, the measured radial velocity will therefore be
a Keplerian function with a semi-amplitude Kmeasured
given by:
Kmeasured =Kp
ρb−mp/m$
1 +ρb
(13)
In many cases, including the case of a Neptune-like
moon orbiting a Jupiter-like planet detected in reﬂected
light, the radial velocity contribution from the moon’s
light might actually dominate over the signal from the
planet’s light. If measured without taking the moon’s
contribution into account, the radial velocity signal de-
tected will be opposite in sign and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
in amplitude from the motion of the planet.
In practice, peak-pulling will only take place when the
radial velocity of the moon is close enough to the ra-
dial velocity of the planet that spectral features from the
planet and moon overlap in the combined spectrum. In
particular, peak-pulling will only be important for the
parts of the planet/moon orbit near conjunctions, when
the radial velocity of the moon is within about v sini
of the radial velocity of the planet. Even when spectral
features from the planet and moon do overlap, analy-
sis techniques have been developed over the years (e.g.
Zucker & Mazeh 1994; Czekala et al. 2017) to disentangle
the contributions from each component of a double-lined
spectrum. If these spectral features can indeed be disen-
tangled, then the secondary lines from the moon could
yield the true mass ratio between the planet and moon,
helping to clarify the moon’s nature.
Peak pulling is likely to be less important for self-
luminous planets, since massive planets should cool more
slowly (and therefore stay luminous longer) than lower-
mass objects. However, one could envision scenarios
where the moon formed after the planet, making it possi-
ble to detect spectral features from a self-luminous moon.
2.6. Partial Occultation by Disk Clumps
Some young, self-luminous planets may still be em-
bedded within the protoplanetary disks from which
they formed. Observations of young stars have shown
that in many cases, protoplanetary disks have optically
thick clumps which can occult the parent stars, quasi-
periodically blocking signiﬁcant fractions of the star’s
light (e.g. Cody et al. 2014; Rodriguez et al. 2015). These
dips can repeat on timescales from days to decades, and
can cause eclipses which last for timescales ranging from
hours to years (Rodriguez et al. 2017). Disk clumps that
occult a rotating planet might cause radial velocity sig-
nals by introducing asymmetries in the planet’s rotation
proﬁle.
To estimate the radial velocity signal caused by disk
clumps occulting a young, self-luminous planet, we as-
sume that clumps in the disk have roughly the same
properties close to the host star and far away where di-
rectly imaged planets might orbit. Cody et al. (2014)
reported observations of “dipper” stars, which undergo
roughly day-long occultations by disk clumps which re-
peat quasi-periodically on timescales of order 5-10 days.
The Keplerian 19 velocity of a disk clump, vclump, which
orbits with a quasi-period, Pq, is given by:
vclump =
[2πGM⋆
Pq
]1/3
(14)
For a typical dipper, which has a quasi-periodicity of
about a week and orbits a star with M⋆≈ 0.5 M⊙, the
Keplerian velocity of the clump is about 80 km s−1. Com-
bined with a dip duration, tdip, of about a day, this ve-
locity implies the clump size,
rclump∼ vclumptdip
2 (15)
is likely of order 5 R⊙, considerably larger than the host
stars. Since the dips only block 30-50% of the star’s light,
the clumps are likely not optically thick.
If similar disk clumps exist farther away from the host
star, at orbital distances of 1-50 AU around more mas-
sive stars like those which have been found to host di-
rectly imaged exoplanets, the Keplerian velocities will
be smaller, on the order of 5-30 km s−1. Occultations of
stars (and directly imaged planets orbiting far out in the
disk) by these long-period disk clumps would last for a
few days to a few weeks.
Any velocity signal induced by an occulting disk clump
would be due to an asymmetry in the ﬂux received from
the approaching hemisphere and the receding hemisphere
of the rotating planet. We estimate this asymmetry by
calculating the change in the ﬂux transmitted through
the clump over a distance from the center of the clump,
dI
dx. We write:
dI
dx∼ dI
dt
dt
dx∼ dI
dt
1
vclump
(16)
Here, dI
dt is just the time derivative light curve of a
dipper star. For typical dippers in short-period orbits
with vclump∼ 80 km s−1and which cause 30-50% drops
in ﬂux on timescales of 12 hours to a day, dI
dt is a few
percent per hour. Combining this value with the orbital
velocity gives dI
dx ∼ 10−5% per km, or about 1% per
Jupiter radius.
The velocity signal caused by this ﬂux gradient due to
an occulting disk clump is therefore given by:
RVclump∼rp
dI
dxv sini (17)
where rp is the radius of the planet. For a Jupiter-
sized planet with an 18 hour rotation period, the RV
signal from disk clump occultations will have an am-
plitude somewhere around 10-50 m s −1, while a larger,
more rapidly rotating planet likeβ Pictoris b could show
signals up to a few hundred meters per second. The
timescales for these signals would be days to weeks (the
crossing time for the clumps over the planet assuming
19 The dust clumps may not be strictly undergoing Keplerian
motion if they are trapped by the star’s magnetic ﬁeld near the
corotation radius, but even in this case the clump velocity will still
be close to Keplerian.

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 9
relative velocities close to the Keplerian orbital velocity),
and the disk occultation signals would likely not repeat
periodically, since the occulting clumps show evolution
on timescales much shorter than the orbit of a directly
imaged planet.
Disk clump occultations will only be a concern for the
very youngest directly imaged planets, whose host stars
still retain their protoplanetary disks. Even the young
exoplanet β Pictoris b is too old for disk clump occul-
tations to be present; the star, β Pictoris, only hosts a
debris disk. Even around very young stars where disk
clump occultations could introduce stochastic variability
into planetary radial velocity time series, the signals in-
troduced should not preclude the detection of massive
exomoons. Like “planetary activity” signals, disk clump
occultations do not produce RV signals with amplitudes
greatly exceeding the amplitudes of RV signals from mas-
sive exomoons. Disk clump occultations should also be
identiﬁable by changes to the planetary line proﬁle. Fi-
nally, statistical techniques designed to aid in the de-
tection of low-mass planets around stars should help to
separate out the stochastic signals from disk clump oc-
cultations from the periodic signals caused by exomoons.
3. DETECTION FEASIBILITY
In this section, we estimate the feasibility of detect-
ing exomoons with Doppler monitoring. We base our
estimates on the successful detection of thermal light
from β Pictoris b by Snellen et al. (2014). Snellen et al.
(2014) observed β Pictoris b with the Cryogenic High-
Resolution Infrared Echelle Spectrograph (CRIRES) be-
hind the Multi-Application Curvature Adaptive Optics
(MACAO) system on the Very Large Telescope (VLT).
At the time of the observations, β Pictoris b was located
about 0.4 arcseconds from its host star, and the adap-
tive optics system attenuated the light fromβ Pictoris by
factors between 8 and 30 at the position of the planet.
Snellen et al. (2014) detected spectral features from β
Pictoris b with a signal-to-noise ratio of 6.4 after a total
exposure time of about 30 minutes 20.
From their low signal-to-noise detection of spectral fea-
tures from β Pictoris b, Snellen et al. (2014) were able
to measure the radial velocity of β Pictoris b with a pre-
cision21 of about 1.5 km s−1.
Detecting exomoons inducing RV semiamplitudes of
about 200 m s−1 is not feasible when the precision of an
individual measurement is limited to 1.5 km s−1, but for-
tunately, higher precision RV measurements are possible.
Following Lovis & Fischer (2010), the photon-limited un-
certainty of a radial velocity observation, σR V, scales as:
σR V∝ FWHM3/2
S/N (18)
where FWHM is the width of the lines as seen by the
spectrograph22 and S/N is the signal-to-noise ratio of
20 The total observing time was closer to an hour after including
overheads (Snellen et al. 2014).
21 Snellen et al. (2014) report an uncertainty of 1.7 km s −1 on
the RV of β Pictoris b, but included a 0.7 km s −1 systematic un-
certainty term based on the uncertainty of the absolute RV, so the
photon-limited Doppler precision is closer to 1.5 km s−1.
22 This term includes both the natural broadness of the spectrum
and instrumental line broadening.
the detection. In particular, S/N is proportional to:
S/N∝
√
S
√
Nlines (19)
whereS is the suppression factor of starlight at the posi-
tion of the planet compared to what would be observed
at the center of the PSF andNlines is the number of spec-
tral lines observed 23. A natural way to improve the RV
precision in a given observation is to increase the signal-
to-noise of the observations 24, which should be possible
with modern instrumentation capabilities.
One way to improve the detection strength would be
to increase the bandpass of the instrument used to ob-
serve radial velocities so that it can observe more plan-
etary spectral features. Snellen et al. (2014) obseved
with CRIRES, which only had one spectral order (which
for these observations was centered on the CO band-
head at 2.3 microns). The upgraded version of CRIRES,
CRIRES+ (Dorn et al. 2014), will be able to cover 10
times the bandpass as the original instrument, signiﬁ-
cantly increasing the number of planetary spectral fea-
tures to use in an RV analysis. If all spectral orders are
equal in terms of the number and depth of lines, a boost
of a factor of 10 in spectral bandpass could improve the
S/N by a factor of roughly 3; realistically, not all spectral
orders will have as many deep and sharp lines as the CO
bandhead, so the improvement will not be as great.
Another way to increase the strength of the detection
would be to use modern high-contrast adaptive optics
imaging and coronagraphy to separate the starlight from
the light of the planet. The observations conducted by
Snellen et al. (2014) achieved a starlight suppression of
about a factor of 8-30 at a distance of 0 .′′4 from the po-
sition of β Pictoris b. Modern adaptive optics systems
equipped with coronagraphs, like GPI (Macintosh et al.
2014) and SPHERE (Beuzit et al. 2008), can signiﬁcantly
improve upon this level of starlight suppression. Accord-
ing to the SPHERE instrument handbook 25, on a bright
star in imaging mode, SPHERE can suppress starlight by
factors of a few thousand or more at distances of 0.′′4, and
can yield even greater suppression (factors of up to 10 4)
when a coronagraph is used. Compared to the Snellen
et al. (2014) observations, using a modern high contrast
AO system could yield a signal-to-noise boost of a factor
of 10, and potentially up to a factor of 30 in S/N.
Altogether, a one-hour observation similar to that con-
ducted by Snellen et al. (2014) using a CRIRES+-like
spectrograph behind a SPHERE-like adaptive optics sys-
tem could yield a detection of β Pictoris b with signal-
to-noise somewhere between 120 and 300, which would
yield a photon-limited Doppler precision on β Pictoris b
between 30 m s−1 and 75 m s−1, suﬃcient to detect mas-
sive exomoons like Kepler-1625b I. We show a simulated
23 The number of lines is typically in the range of 10 3− 104
for broadband spectrographs observing stars. Both self-luminous
and reﬂected-light planets will likely have more lines due to the
presence of molecular absorption in the spectra.
24 Alternatively, the precision of RV observations could be im-
proved by observing a planet that rotates more slowly than β Pic-
toris b and therefore has narrower spectral features. Indeed, obser-
vations of GQ Lupi b (Schwarz et al. 2016), which is more slowly
rotating than β Pictoris b, achieved RV precision of about 400
m s−1.
25 See Figure 13 of https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/
paranal/instruments/sphere/doc/VLT-MAN-SPH-14690-0430_
v95.pdf

<<<PAGE 10>>>
10 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
0 5 10 15 20
Time (days)
0
200
400
600
800
1000Radial Velocity (ms-1)
Simulated observations of β  Pictoris b
with Kepler-1625b I-like moon
0 5 10 15 20
Time (days)
0
200
400
600
800
1000Radial Velocity (ms-1)
Fig. 6.— Simulated observations of the self-luminous directly imaged planetβ Pictoris b, assuming it hosts a Kepler-1625b I-like exomoon.
The purple points simulate a nightly observing cadence, and assume 30 m s −1 RV photon-limited uncertainties (see Section 3). The red
curve is the center-of-mass motion of the planet; the long-term trend is due to the orbit of the planet about its host star, and the fast
sinusoid is due to the orbit of the moon about the planet. The grey curve is the total expected RV curve, including “planetary activity”
caused by inhomogeneities rotating in and out of view on the surface of the planet. We calculated the planetary activity signal using the
FF’ method described by Aigrain et al. (2012), assuming a planetary radius of 1.45 R J (Morzinski et al. 2015), and photometric variability
from K2 obserations of Neptune (Rowe et al. 2017), with the timescale of the variations scaled from Neptune’s 16 hour rotation period to
β Pictoris b’s likely 7 hour rotation period. The RV signal due to the exomoon in this case is clearly detected (with a bootstrapped false
alarm probability of p≈ 5× 10−4) in only three weeks of nightly observations.
RV detection of a Kepler-1625b I-like moon orbiting β
Pictoris b in Figure 6.
While it should be possible to detect planetary spec-
tral features with high enough signal-to-noise to mea-
sure precise radial velocities on planets like β Pictoris
b with existing telescopes and modern instrumentation,
we note that this capability should be dramatically in-
creased when the next generation of 30-meter-class tele-
scopes come on line. All else being equal, the signal-
to-noise ratio of a direct imaging detection of a planet
is proportional to the diameter of the telescope squared.
Compared to the observations performed by Snellen et al.
(2014) on the 8 meter VLT, a similar observation a 30-
meter-class telescope (such as using GMTNIRS on the
Giant Magellan Telescope, Jaﬀe et al. 2016) would yield
a signal-to-noise roughly (30/8)2≈ 15 times higher. Ad-
ditionally, starlight suppression on 30 meter class tele-
scopes should be much better than on 8 meter class tele-
scopes at a given separation on the sky, because the sep-
aration will be greater in terms of the telescope’s reso-
lution elements. In fact, Snellen et al. (2014) argue that
thanks to the higher resolution of 30 meter class tele-
scopes, scattered light from β Pictoris should have negli-
gible impact on spectroscopic observations of β Pictoris
b, making it possible to obtain high-quality planetary
spectra with only short observations. When combined
with the expected improvement in the performance of
high-contrast imaging systems in the coming years, 30-
meter-class telescopes should make Doppler surveys of
large numbers of directly imaged planets feasible (Quanz
et al. 2015).
Detecting exomoons around planets imaged in reﬂected
light will be more diﬃcult. So far, no exoplanets have
been detected in reﬂected light by direct imaging 26, but
improvements to adaptive optics systems and the con-
struction of 30 meter class telescopes are expected to lead
to detections of these planets (Artigau et al. 2018 27, J.
Males et al. in prep). These planets detected in reﬂected
light are likely to be quite faint, with nearby ( ≈ 10 pc)
giant planets in Jupiter-like orbits having optical appar-
ent magnitudes around 25, which will make precise RVs
diﬃcult but not impossible. Using the 10m Keck I tele-
scope, Johnson et al. (2012) measured radial velocities of
a V=17 star with precision of 20 m s−1 in 20 minute ex-
posures. Scaling these observations to a 30m class tele-
scope, with a wider spectral bandpass (Johnson et al.
2012 used an iodine cell to calibrate their radial velocity
observations which limited their bandpass to about 100
nm) and higher spectral resolution expected for future
26 Reﬂected light from short-period exoplanets has been detected
by Kepler and CoRoT (e.g. Alonso et al. 2009; Borucki et al. 2009;
Sanchis-Ojeda et al. 2013; Malavolta et al. 2018).
27 http://surveygizmoresponseuploads.s3.
amazonaws.com/fileuploads/15647/4139225/
235-ba43dcc83ed8463dd0e7af6cb4f510ba_FitzgeraldMichaelP.
pdf

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 11
generations of precise spectrographs, it should be pos-
sible to measure RVs with a bit lower precision ( ≈ 100
m s−1) on 26th magnitude stars in one hour exposures.
Also, planets more readily detectable in reﬂected light
than Jupiter may be discovered – the brightness of a
planet in reﬂected light is inversely proportional to its
orbital distance squared, so closer planets to their host
stars will be much easier to detect (Traub & Oppen-
heimer 2010). However, close-in exoplanets may be less
likely to host exomoons than more distant exoplanets be-
cause requirements for dynamical stability closer to the
star are more stringent.
4. DISCUSSION
So far, we have shown that massive exomoons like the
candidate moon around Kepler-1625b could induce large
RV variations on the moon’s host planet, and we have
shown that RV variations of this amplitude could be
detected with present-day or forthcoming instrumenta-
tion. Here, we argue that a radial velocity survey of di-
rectly imaged exoplanets to detect massive exomoons is a
worthwhile endeavor, and we describe additional science
which might come from such a survey.
First and foremost, if an RV exomoon survey of directly
imaged exoplanets is successful, the detection of an exo-
moon (or exomoons) would provide new and important
knowledge about planetary systems that could not be ac-
cessed in any other way. For example, either the discov-
ery of massive exomoons, or limits placed on the presence
of such moons, would directly inform models of planet
and moon formation. It is generally believed that moons
as large as the proposed Kepler-1625b I cannot form via
in-situ accretion in a circumplanetary disk; the mass ra-
tio of Kepler-1625b I to its host planet is too large to be
formed in this way. Therefore, the presence of moons like
Kepler-1625b I around giant planets would likely indicate
that some dynamic process (either a capture process or
a giant impact) took place. If a population of massive
Kepler-1625b I-like exomoons were to be found, it would,
like the discovery of hot Jupiters, indicate that planet
(and moon) formation is a more dramatic and eventful
process than previously thought. The successful detec-
tion of massive exomoons could turn planetary formation
theory on its head the way the detection of hot Jupiters
did decades ago.
Even if massive exomoons turn out to be rare or don’t
exist, there are strong scientiﬁc motivations to conduct
an RV survey of directly imaged planets. One such moti-
vation would be detecting planetary activity signals due
to the surface inhomogeneities rotating in and out of view
on the planets’ surfaces. While these signals are a nui-
sance to detecting center-of-mass radial velocity varia-
tions like those caused by exomoons, the planetary ac-
tivity signals encode the rotation period of the planet.
When combined with a spectroscopic estimate of the pro-
jected rotational velocity (from the broadening of spec-
tral features) and planet radii, these measured planetary
rotation periods could yield some of the ﬁrst measure-
ments of line-of-sight exoplanet obliquities (angles be-
tween the planet orbits and spin axes). A survey which
yields the rotation periods for a sample of directly imaged
planets could begin to assess whether strong dynamical
interactions like those which tilted Uranus in our own
Solar system are common or rare.
Additionally, measurements of the obliquities of plan-
ets detected in reﬂected light might be obtained by mea-
suring the planetary illumination RV eﬀect, which en-
codes the planet’s obliquity both in the line-of-sight and
sky-projected directions. The planetary illumination RV
eﬀect could yield even more information than combining
rotational velocities and rotation periods if it is possible
to disentangle the signal from the planet’s orbital motion.
One way to disentangle the signals is to take advantage
of the fact that the planetary illumination eﬀect is only
present in reﬂected-light observations. Comparing RV
observations of the same planet in the visible, where re-
ﬂected light is dominant, and far enough in the infrared
that even cool planets are self-luminous could cleanly
separate these two signals, making obliquity measure-
ments possible.
Another outcome from an RV survey of directly im-
aged planets would be to very precisely trace out the
spectroscopic orbit of self-luminous planets (and planets
imaged in reﬂected light if the orbital signal can be dis-
entangled from the planetary illumination eﬀect). The
RV signals due to the planets’ orbits around their host
stars have amplitudes much higher than the RV preci-
sion necessary for the survey, so these observations could
yield highly precise orbital elements. For directly imaged
planets around stars for which precise radial velocities
are diﬃcult or infeasible (like rapidly rotating and active
young stars), measuring the planet’s spectroscopic orbit
could reﬁne orbital elements like period and eccentricity,
and could yield a precise dynamical mass measurement
for the host star. Measuring the spectroscopic orbit of a
planet which has already been detected in radial velocity
monitoring of its host star could yield model independent
masses for both objects.
Finally, an important byproduct of an RV survey of di-
rectly imaged planets will be very high signal-to-noise co-
added planetary spectra. We estimate that with present-
day instrumentation, it should be possible to detect spec-
tral features inβ Pictoris b at a signiﬁcance of 120-300σ
in an hour of observations. Over the course of a Doppler
survey, there may be 50-100 individual observations of
the planet with this quality. Co-adding all of these spec-
tra could yield some of the highest-quality spectra ever
taken of exoplanets. High quality spectra like these could
lead to the detection of trace elements in the planet at-
mospheres.
5. SUMMARY
In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of detect-
ing exomoons by conducting a Doppler survey of directly
imaged exoplanets. We drew inspiration from the detec-
tion of a massive candidate exomoon (about the size and
mass of Neptune) around the planet Kepler-1625b. If the
candidate exomoon around Kepler-1625b is conﬁrmed, it
would be the ﬁrst in a new class of moons unlike anything
seen before in our Solar System.
We suggest that in analogy to the discovery of the ﬁrst
exoplanets orbiting sun-like stars (Struve 1952; Mayor &
Queloz 1995), some of the ﬁrst exo-moons discovered, like
the proposed Kepler-1625b I, might be massive and or-
biting in short periods around their host planets, making
them well suited for detection via radial velocity moni-
toring. We estimate the amplitudes and timescales of
radial velocity signals that might be present in observa-

<<<PAGE 12>>>
12 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
tions of directly imaged planets, and ﬁnd that the RV
semiamplitudes induced by massive moons like Kepler-
1625b I could range from a few hundred meters per sec-
ond up to a kilometer per second. These signals from
massive exomoons are large enough that astrophysical
nuisance signals and instrumental stability should not
prevent their detection.
Based on previous spectroscopic observations of
directly imaged exoplanets, we estimate that it should
be possible to measure radial velocities with fairly high
photon-limited precision with reasonable exposure times
on bright directly imaged exoplanets. We estimate that
using a wide-bandpass high-resolution near infrared
spectrograph like CRIRES+ or IGRINS on an 8 meter
class telescope behind a modern high-contrast adaptive
optics imaging system like GPI or SPHERE, it should
be possible to attain photon-limited Doppler precision
between 30 and 75 m s −1 on β Pictoris b, suﬃcient
to detect the RV signal caused by a Kepler-1625b
I-like moon. The observations required to detect
giant exomoons around directly imaged planets should
yield additional scientiﬁc byproducts, including high
signal-to-noise planet spectra and measurements of the
spin axis orientation (obliquity) of these directly imaged
exoplanets.
Note in Review: Since this manuscript was completed,
we have become aware of some impressive analytic work
by Kawahara (2012) on the planetary illumination/spin
eﬀect. He was able to carry out the illumination-phase
spin radial-velocity integral (RV(α)) analytically for arbi-
trary orbital inclinations as well as planetary spin vectors
for a couple of simple scattering laws. We have veriﬁed
that his analytic expression for the case of Lambertian
scattering does indeed match our numerical integrations.
However, for more complicated and realistic planetary at-
mospheric scattering functions, the numerical approach
we describe is likely to be necessary.
We thank Brendan Bowler, Cyndi Froning, Eric Gai-
dos, Adam Kraus, Caroline Morley, Sam Quinn, Aaron
Rizzuto, and Joey Rodriguez for valuable conversations.
We are indebted the anonymous referee for a constructive
report which improved this paper. This work was per-
formed in part under contract with the California Insti-
tute of Technology (Caltech)/Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL) funded by NASA through the Sagan Fellowship
Program executed by the NASA Exoplanet Science In-
stitute. This paper includes data collected by the Kepler
mission. Funding for the Kepler mission is provided by
the NASA Science Mission directorate.
Facilities: ADS, CDS
APPENDIX
In this appendix, we describe a numerical scheme to determine the integrated radial velocity of the illuminated surface
of a planet imaged in reﬂected light. We perform the integration numerically by randomly sampling points on the
illuminated hemisphere of an exoplanet, calculating the velocity contribution from each point on the hemisphere, and
summing the contributions. For this process, we need to know (1) the radial velocity of each point on the illuminated
surface of the planet, (2) the brightness of that point for diﬀerent assumed scattering laws, and (3) whether, in fact,
that point is visible to a distant observer. The velocity of an arbitrary point on the surface of the planet can be written
schematically as:
⃗V = ⃗Vo +⃗Vp +⃗Vs (A.1)
where ⃗Vo is the orbital velocity of the center of mass (‘CM’) of the planet/moon (or binary planet) system in its ‘outer’
orbit about the host star; ⃗Vp the orbital velocity of the primary planet about the CM of the planet/moon system
(which we assume here to be coplanar with the outer orbit); and ⃗Vs the velocity associated with the inertial spin rate
of the primary planet about its center.
The velocity of the CM of the planet/moon system is given by
⃗Vo =− Ωoao√
1−e2o
[
{cos(ϕ−ϕe) +eo sinω} ˆX +{sin(ϕ−ϕe)−eo cosωo} ˆY
]
(A.2)
where Ωoao/
√
1−e2o, eo, and ωo are the conventional radial velocity semiamplitude (Ko, see Equation 3 in the main
paper), eccentricity, and argument of periastron, while ϕ is the true anomaly of the planet/moon CM in its outer
orbit, and ϕe is the true anomaly at the time of superior conjunction (or eclipse). The geometry of the X−Y plane
is speciﬁed in Figure A.1. This form for ⃗Vo is especially useful in the case of orbits with small eccentricity. If, on
the other hand, we wish to deal with substantial eccentricities, then we can simply revert to the more usual form by
setting ϕe +ω =π/2.
We assume that the planet/moon system has an orbit that has been circularized and is coplanar with the orbit of
its CM around the host star. The velocity of the primary planet around the planet/moon CM is then:
Vp =−Ωpap
( m$
mp +m$
)[
cosφp ˆX + sinφp ˆY
]
(A.3)
where the leading factor outside the square brackets is just the radial velocity semiamplitude of the primary planet
in its orbit about the planet/moon CM ( Kp, see Equation 1 in the main paper), and φp is the planet/moon system’s
orbital phase. The same X−Y orbital plane is used here as for the outer orbit.

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 13
Fig. A.1.— Schematic of the illuminated planet geometry, not to scale. The host star is located at the origin of the {X,Y} coordinate
system. The ‘illumination coordinates’, along with the true anomaly of the outer orbit relative to the eclipse, ϕo, and the outer orbital
inclination angle, i, determine the planetary phase. The planetary hemisphere facing the host star contains the set of normal vectors ˆ n,
whose origin is at the planet center and whose constant vector components are with respect to the {x′,y′,z′} coordinate frame. The two
frames are both right-handed, so the Z and z′ axes come directly out of the page/screen.
Fig. A.2.— Schematic of the sky-projected coordinate system. The observer is looking along the ˆ y direction, while the plane of the sky
coincides with the x−z plane. Left: The system viewed from the positive ˆx direction. The observer is shown at the left, and the orbit of
the planet projected on the y−z plane is a straight line tilted by the inclination angle io with respect to the y axis. The angle β is the
cone angle between the planet’s spin and the line of sight (the ˆy direction). Right: The system viewed from the negative ˆy direction (the
observer’s point of view). The orbit of the planet is shown projected on the sky plane, and is represented by a circle that has been tilted
by the inclination angle io. When the spin vector is projected onto the sky plane, its orientation is described by the angle ξ that it makes
with respect to the x axis.
If we now perform a rotation about the ˆX axis, which lies in the plane of the sky, by an angle io (the orbital
inclination angle), we ﬁnd for the radial velocities:
Vro = Ωoao√
1−e2o
[sin(ϕ−ϕe)−eo cosωo] sinio (A.4)
Vrp = Ωpap
( m$
mp +m$
)
sinφp sinio (A.5)
All of the above holds whether the primary planet is self-luminous or illuminated by the host star. The following,
however, holds only for externally illuminated planets. For self-luminous planets, the following terms average to zero
(unless some other asymmetry is introduced in the planet’s brightness proﬁle, like a disk clump occultation or planetary
activity). Computing the Doppler shifts for the case of an externally illuminated planet is the more challenging part
of the calculation.
We ﬁrst select a set of unit vectors, ˆn′, which point from the center to the surface of the planet. The two angles
describing each unit vector are Θ and Φ such that
ˆn′ = sin Θ cos Φ ˆx′− cos Θ ˆy′ + sin Θ sin Φ ˆz′ (A.6)
(see the diagram in Figure A.1 for the deﬁnition of the {x′,y′,z′} coordinate system). In order to populate these
vectors over the hemisphere that is illuminated by the very distant host star, the angles Φ are uniformly sampled
around 2π, while the angle Θ is distributed with a probability per unit Θ of 2 cos Θ sin Θ.

<<<PAGE 14>>>
14 Vanderburg, Rappaport, and Mayo
For diﬀerent true anomalies of the outer orbit, and an outer orbital inclination angle of io, a distant observer sees
these normal vectors as
nx =n′
x cosϕo−n′
y sinϕo (A.7)
ny =n′
x sinϕo sinio +n′
y cosϕo sinio−n′
z cosio (A.8)
nz =n′
x sinϕo cosio +n′
y cosϕo cosio +n′
z sinio (A.9)
where the directions{ˆx, ˆy, ˆz} refer to the observer’s coordinates, and, in particular, ˆy is the observer’s view direction
(see Figure A.2 for a schematic of the geometry). Here we have used a shorthand notation with ϕo≡ ϕ−ϕe. The
velocity of a point on the planet’s surface speciﬁed by ˆ n has a velocity in the observer’s ﬁxed coordinate system of
⃗Vs =rp⃗ ωs× ˆn which can be written as the expansion of the following determinant:
⃗Vs =rp
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
ˆx ˆy ˆz
ωs,x ωs,y ωs,z
nx ny nz
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
where the angular velocity vector,⃗ ωs, rotated to the observer’s ﬁxed coordinate system has the following components:
ωs,x =ωs sinβ cosξ (A.10)
ωs,y =ωs cosβ (A.11)
ωs,z =ωs sinβ sinξ (A.12)
and whereβ is the angle between the planet’s spin vector and the observer’s view direction, and ξ is the angle that the
planet’s spin vector, projected onto the sky plane, makes with respect to the x axis (see the geometry in Figure A.2).
In general, the cross product, ⃗ ωs× ˆn is a fairly messy expression, except for the trivial case where β = 0 (i.e., we
are looking along the planet’s spin vector), in which case the radial component of ⃗Vs = 0. However, the determinant
is simple enough to evaluate numerically.
The information contained in the ˆn vectors is suﬃcient to determine (1) whether that point on the planet’s surface is
visible at a given instant, and (2) the surface brightness of that point, depending on the scattering law. To determine
the visibility of the surface point speciﬁed by a given ˆ n, we simply examine the dot product of that vector with the
line of sight vector ˆy, and require that it be negative:
ˆy· ˆn =ny = sin Θ cos Φ sinϕo sinio− cos Θ cosϕo sinio− sin Θ sin Φ cosio < 0 (A.13)
In the restricted case of viewing the outer orbit edge on, this reduces to the condition that
sin Θ cos Φ sinϕo− cos Θ cosϕo < 0 (A.14)
tan Θ cos Φ tanϕo < 1 (A.15)
Once the dot product of a normal vector with respect to the view direction has been computed, this yields the cosine
of the emission angle with respect to the normal to the planetary surface. This can be used to compute the intensity
of the radiation from that surface element if the scattering law is speciﬁed. For example, if the radiation obeys a
Lambertian law, then one multiplies by the dot product to ﬁnd the relative amount of radiation from that surface
element. For isotropic scattering the factor is just unity, and so forth. Finally, the total integrated radial velocity
can be calculated by summing the contribution from each sampled surface element and dividing by the total summed
intensity from the samples.
REFERENCES
Agol, E., Jansen, T., Lacy, B., Robinson, T. D., & Meadows, V.
2015, ApJ, 812, 5
Aigrain, S., Pont, F., & Zucker, S. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 3147
Alonso, R., Alapini, A., Aigrain, S., et al. 2009, A&A, 506, 353
Artigau, ´E. 2018, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1803.07672
Artigau, E., Bernstein, R. A., Brandt, T., et al. 2018, ArXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1808.09632
Beuzit, J.-L., Feldt, M., Dohlen, K., et al. 2008, in Proc. SPIE,
Vol. 7014, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for
Astronomy II, 701418
Biller, B. A., Vos, J., Bonavita, M., et al. 2015, ApJ, 813, L23
Boisse, I., Bouchy, F., H´ ebrard, G., et al. 2011, A&A, 528, A4
Bond, I. A., Udalski, A., Jaroszy´ nski, M., et al. 2004, ApJ, 606,
L155
Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Jenkins, J., et al. 2009, Science, 325,
709
Bryan, M. L., Benneke, B., Knutson, H. A., Batygin, K., &
Bowler, B. P. 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, 138
Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., Williams, E., et al. 1996, PASP,
108, 500
Cabrera, J., & Schneider, J. 2007, A&A, 464, 1133
Cabrera, J., Csizmadia, S., Lehmann, H., et al. 2014, ApJ, 781, 18
Campbell, B., Walker, G. A. H., & Yang, S. 1988, ApJ, 331, 902
Charbonneau, D., Berta, Z. K., Irwin, J., et al. 2009, Nature, 462,
891
Cody, A. M., Stauﬀer, J., Baglin, A., et al. 2014, AJ, 147, 82
Collier Cameron, A. 2017, The Impact of Stellar Activity on the
Detection and Characterization of Exoplanets, 23
Czekala, I., Mandel, K. S., Andrews, S. M., et al. 2017, ApJ, 840,
49
Damasso, M., Bonomo, A. S., Astudillo-Defru, N., et al. 2018,
A&A, 615, A69
Dittmann, J. A., Irwin, J. M., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2017,
Nature, 544, 333
Donati, J. F., Moutou, C., Malo, L., et al. 2016, Nature, 534, 662
Dorn, R. J., Anglada-Escude, G., Baade, D., et al. 2014, The
Messenger, 156, 7

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Radial Velocity Detection of Exomoons 15
Dumusque, X., Santos, N. C., Udry, S., Lovis, C., & Bonﬁls, X.
2011a, A&A, 527, A82
Dumusque, X., Udry, S., Lovis, C., Santos, N. C., & Monteiro,
M. J. P. F. G. 2011b, A&A, 525, A140
Dumusque, X., Lovis, C., S´ egransan, D., et al. 2011c, A&A, 535,
A55
Figueira, P., Santos, N. C., Pepe, F., Lovis, C., & Nardetto, N.
2013, A&A, 557, A93
Fressin, F., Torres, G., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766, 81
Gelino, C., & Marley, M. 2000, in Astronomical Society of the
Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 212, From Giant Planets to Cool
Stars, ed. C. A. Griﬃth & M. S. Marley, 322
Haywood, R. D., Collier Cameron, A., Queloz, D., et al. 2014,
MNRAS, 443, 2517
Haywood, R. D., Collier Cameron, A., Unruh, Y. C., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 457, 3637
Heller, R. 2014, ApJ, 787, 14
—. 2016, A&A, 588, A34
—. 2018, A&A, 610, A39
Heller, R., & Albrecht, S. 2014, ApJ, 796, L1
Hill, M. L., Kane, S. R., Seperuelo Duarte, E., et al. 2018, ApJ,
860, 67
Hippke, M. 2015, ApJ, 806, 51
Hoeijmakers, H. J., Schwarz, H., Snellen, I. A. G., et al. 2018,
ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1802.09721
Hook, I. 2005, The science case for the European Extremely Large
Telescope : the next step in mankind’s quest for the Universe
Jaﬀe, D. T., Barnes, S., Brooks, C., et al. 2016, in Proc. SPIE,
Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for
Astronomy VI, 990821
Johnson, J. A., Gazak, J. Z., Apps, K., et al. 2012, AJ, 143, 111
Kawahara, H. 2012, ApJ, 760, L13
Kipping, D. M. 2009, MNRAS, 392, 181
Kipping, D. M., Bakos, G. ´A., Buchhave, L., Nesvorn´ y, D., &
Schmitt, A. 2012, ApJ, 750, 115
Kipping, D. M., Forgan, D., Hartman, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777,
134
Kipping, D. M., Huang, X., Nesvorn´ y, D., et al. 2015a, ApJ, 799,
L14
Kipping, D. M., Schmitt, A. R., Huang, X., et al. 2015b, ApJ,
813, 14
Latham, D. W., Stefanik, R. P., Mazeh, T., Mayor, M., & Burki,
G. 1989, Nature, 339, 38
Lester, T. P., McCall, M. L., & Tatum, J. B. 1979, JRASC, 73,
233
Lew, B. W. P., Apai, D., Zhou, Y., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, L32
Lillo-Box, J., Kipping, D., Rebollido, I., et al. 2018, ArXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1803.04010
L´ opez-Morales, M., Haywood, R. D., Coughlin, J. L., et al. 2016,
AJ, 152, 204
Lovis, C., & Fischer, D. 2010, Radial Velocity Techniques for
Exoplanets, ed. S. Seager, 27–53
Macintosh, B., Graham, J. R., Ingraham, P., et al. 2014,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 111, 12661
Malavolta, L., Mayo, A. W., Louden, T., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 107
Marois, C., Macintosh, B., Barman, T., et al. 2008, Science, 322,
1348
Mayor, M., & Queloz, D. 1995, Nature, 378, 355
Mayor, M., Pepe, F., Queloz, D., et al. 2003, The Messenger, 114,
20
Metchev, S. A., Heinze, A., Apai, D., et al. 2015, ApJ, 799, 154
Morton, T. D., Bryson, S. T., Coughlin, J. L., et al. 2016, ApJ,
822, 86
Morzinski, K. M., Males, J. R., Skemer, A. J., et al. 2015, ApJ,
815, 108
Motalebi, F., Udry, S., Gillon, M., et al. 2015, A&A, 584, A72
Mullally, F., Coughlin, J. L., Thompson, S. E., et al. 2015, ApJS,
217, 31
Quanz, S. P., Crossﬁeld, I., Meyer, M. R., Schmalzl, E., & Held,
J. 2015, International Journal of Astrobiology, 14, 279
Queloz, D., Henry, G. W., Sivan, J. P., et al. 2001, A&A, 379, 279
Radigan, J. 2014, ApJ, 797, 120
Rajpaul, V., Aigrain, S., Osborne, M. A., Reece, S., & Roberts, S.
2015, MNRAS, 452, 2269
Rodriguez, J. E., Pepper, J., Stassun, K. G., et al. 2015, AJ, 150,
32
Rodriguez, J. E., Zhou, G., Cargile, P. A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 836,
209
Rowe, J. F., Gaulme, P., Lissauer, J. J., et al. 2017, AJ, 153, 149
Saar, S. H., & Donahue, R. A. 1997, ApJ, 485, 319
Sanchis-Ojeda, R., Rappaport, S., Winn, J. N., et al. 2013, ApJ,
774, 54
Sartoretti, P., & Schneider, J. 1999, A&AS, 134, 553
Schwarz, H., Ginski, C., de Kok, R. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 593,
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201628908
Sengupta, S., & Marley, M. S. 2016, ApJ, 824, 76
Snellen, I. A. G., Brandl, B. R., de Kok, R. J., et al. 2014,
Nature, 509, 63
Stauﬀer, J., Marley, M. S., Gizis, J. E., et al. 2016, AJ, 152, 142
Struve, O. 1952, The Observatory, 72, 199
Teachey, A., Kipping, D. M., & Schmitt, A. R. 2018, AJ, 155, 36
Traub, W. A., & Oppenheimer, B. R. 2010, Direct Imaging of
Exoplanets, ed. S. Seager, 111–156
Vanderburg, A., Plavchan, P., Johnson, J. A., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 459, 3565
Vos, J. M., Allers, K. N., Biller, B. A., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 474,
1041
Wang, J. J., Graham, J. R., Pueyo, L., et al. 2016, AJ, 152, 97
Wilson, P. A., Rajan, A., & Patience, J. 2014, A&A, 566, A111
Wolszczan, A., & Frail, D. A. 1992, Nature, 355, 145
Wright, J. T. 2005, PASP, 117, 657
Zhou, Y., Apai, D., Schneider, G. H., Marley, M. S., & Showman,
A. P. 2016, ApJ, 818, 176
Zucker, S., & Mazeh, T. 1994, ApJ, 420, 806